Every day, the moderators of BlackPeopleTwitter—the Reddit forum devoted to screenshots of tweets from black people—sort through inboxes filled with jokes about cooking, dating, or watching Marvel movies. And according to moderator “DubTeeDub,” that also means dealing with a “never-ending stream of slurs.”

Starting on April 1, BlackPeopleTwitter’s moderators announced that only Reddit users who had verified that they were black could continue to post comments or threads on the subreddit. Black commenters could send in a photo of their forearm next to a sign with their username written on it. In return, they’d get a checkmark next to their profile verifying that they were black.

The April Fool’s Day experiment outraged the right-wing internet and has shaken up how one of Reddit’s biggest forums deals with race.

With more than 3 million subscribers, BlackPeopleTwitter has become Reddit’s 59th most popular subreddit, according to Redditlist. The subreddit relies on a simple idea: screenshotting tweets, usually jokes, from black Twitter users.

“Black Twitter” has been a concept online since at least 2008, according to Mia Moody-Ramirez, a professor at Baylor University who co-authored a book studying black humor and Black Twitter. Black Twitter, Moody-Ramirez told The Daily Beast, is where black Twitter users can use humor to deal with difficult issues.

Black people are more represented in Twitter’s user base than they are in the population at large, according to Moody-Ramirez, making Black Twitter more visible. In 2010, Slate columnist Farhad Manjoo wrote about how black Twitter users “do seem to use Twitter differently from everyone else.”

That same interest in Black Twitter had pushed the subreddit to the top of Reddit. The April Fool’s Day plan to deal with the influx of non-black posters that popularity brought in went well at first. 

Hundreds of black posters sent in pictures of their forearms, and the moderators initially faced an “overwhelmingly positive response,” according to moderator DubTeeDub.

“Don’t get mad when we vote back in segregation,” wrote one Reddit user.  

The backlash to the BlackPeopleTwitter policy even inspired an InfoWars article from right-wing internet personality Paul Joseph Watson. Citing the non-black Reddit users who had asked to be verified to use the subreddit, Watson wrote that they were “humiliating” themselves.

Under pressure, the BlackPeopleTwitter pulled the ban on non-black users after three days, rather than keeping it place for the entire week. Still, much of the racial verification system is still in place.

Reddit didn’t respond to a request for comment.

In the past, the moderators had to close comments on politically heated threads. Now they turn those threads into “Country Club Mode,” a restricted posting system in which only verified users of any race are allowed to comment. Unverified users are still allowed to post in other threads.

The backlash from other parts of Reddit hasn’t stopped BlackPeopleTwitter users from trying to get verified. Other, non-black posters can still be verified as allies, while black posters who have verified their race still get a checkmark next to their name to “combat perceptions of digital blackface.” Faced with thousands of verification applications and a limit imposed by the Reddit system on how many people they can approve each day, the moderation team has brought on new people to deal with the flood of requests.

Almost every black person in America has experienced the sting of disrespect on the basis of being black. A large but undetermined number of black people feel acutely disrespected in their everyday lives, discrimination they see as both subtle and explicit. 


While American society purports to be open and egalitarian, or “equal opportunity”, such everyday outcomes leave black people deeply doubtful. Moreover, black people are generally convinced that they must work twice as hard to get half as far in life.

After Emancipation, as black people migrated to cities in the north and south, their stigma both followed and preceded them.

Following the civil rights movement, a “racial incorporation” process of the 1970s and 1980s was established, and along with “fair housing”, school integration, and “affirmative action, it benefited many black people . Many of these people have joined the larger American middle class, and they and their children have become increasingly assimilated. 

'I can feel aggression because of my color': Americans tell of everyday racism

The nod
 While desperately poor black people resided in that community, it also included well-educated professional people, supportive social structures, and a strong focus on propriety and decency.

Today, black people inhabit all levels of the American class and occupational structure. They attend the best schools, pursue the professions of their choosing, and occupy various positions of power, privilege and prestige. But for the ascendant black upper middle class, in the shadows lurks the specter of the urban ghetto. The iconic ghetto is always in the background, shaping Americans’ conception of the anonymous black person as well as the circumstances of black people in all walks of life.

In 2018, many Black people in America believe that it is not important or relevant to consider them Black. They see their race as human, and they have no faith in the Black or African American culture and race. There is only one race, and that is the human race, and it is time to let go of the race card and stop thinking Black.

Many genetic experts and people around the globe believe there is no scientific basis for race, and it’s a made-up label.

“In the wake of fresh deaths at the hands of police officers in the world’s greatest nation, we the people of the Black race are once again the object of renewed worldwide attention. Questions of injustices in the United States have been duly raised and protested. And, once again, the Black cultural elites in America are talking about racism, discrimination, racial profiling, and hate, among other issues,” says Chigozie Obioma.

It is absurd and ridiculous to think in 2018, under the Trump administration, that race does not exist, and America is a colorless society. When our racist-in-chief makes it no secret that he is a neo-Nazis sympathizer, it is time for Black Americans to open up their eyes, unify, and work together.

It is no accident that Trump is driven by an irrational hatred of everything Obama, and there are very few African Americans in his administration. On the other hand, President Trump calls neo-Nazis good people as they carry torches and shouting about racist purity.

“Far too many people are surprised by Trump’s racism, which is as ignorant as it is blatant. Donald Trump knows a thing or two about ‘shitholes’ – the label he apparently bestowed on El Salvador, Haiti, and various African nations during an Oval Office meeting about immigration,” says Richard Wolffe of the Guardian.

Black Americans in 2018 and beyond must reclaim their unity and restore the dignity of the Black race in America and around the globe. Racism is not limited to the United States, and today we hear how China, India and other nations are taking over Africa economically. The fate and survival of Black people in America is inextricably linked to Black people in Africa, the Caribbeans and around the world.

“Great men like Marcus Garvey, W.E.B. Du Bois, and Malcolm X all knew that a people are only respected when it has a nation worthy of respect. They knew that for us to reclaim power we must first reclaim dignity, and that comes through the construction of a solid Black state with a demonstrable level of development and prosperity – and which can stand as a powerful advocate for the global Black,” states Obioma.

It is time for Blacks in America to operate with respect, and work with a formative and functional Black Agenda. It is time to speak with one voice and in our community focus on


In 2019, the challenge for Blacks in America is to work together with a Black united front and depend on each other based on a Black Agenda. We can no longer think our government under Trump is working to save the Black Race, we must save our self.

Our dignity and respect must begin as Black people in our families, and then our community, our country, and then the world. The great W.E.B. DuBois says, “The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line,” and nothing has changed in the 21st century.

In a recent televised commentary, Dr. Greg Carr, chair of Howard University’s Department of Afro-American Studies kick-started a stirring conversation that has mostly taken place inside the confines of Black communities around the country.

Carr tackled the sometimes-uncomfortable topic of identifying as Black versus African-American.

“Despite the dictionary definitions, there is no term that truly describes people that were taken from Africa and forced into slavery,” Carr said during commentary on Washington, D.C.’s WUSA.

NNPA Newswire followed up by reaching out to several individuals of color – Blacks, African Americans – in attempt to gain the pulse of just which way many lean.


“Growing up in Africa, where almost everyone is Black makes it difficult for people who grow up in that environment to understand, grasp and identify with Black as a signifier the same way that people born and raised in the West do,” Chimbganda said.

Harvard and Yale-trained physician, Dr. Hisla Bates, said race is a social construct and shouldn’t define anyone.

“I don’t like to be called Black or African American because it doesn’t define me and is dismissive of my heritage and ethnic makeup. I am from the Caribbean and prefer Caribbean American rather than African American,” Bates said.

“There are so many ways to be ‘Black’ and so many mixtures and countries that when we define people by a single color, we miss multiple parts of who they are. That is true for Whites as well,” she said.

Dr. Gail L. Thompson, the founder and CEO of Inspirations by Gail LLC, said “Black is a general term that includes anyone of African descent, including indigenous Africans, African Americans, Caribbean Blacks, and immigrants.”

“A Black person can live anywhere in the world,” she said.

Thompson defined African American as a U.S. citizen of African descent whose ancestors lived in America before and during the era of the Transatlantic Slave Trade.

“I am an African American who can trace my ancestry in the U.S. for five generations,” Thompson said. “According to my DNA test results, my ancestry is 92 percent African, primarily from the Congo/Cameroon region and Benin and Togo.”

Further, the term “People of Color” refers to all non-White ethnic/racial groups. It’s a very general term, Thompson said.

Hip Hop Activist and author Sean XLG Mitchell, said there’s a significant difference between the labels of ‘Black,’ ‘African American,’ and ‘People of Color.’

“If we use the term Black, we are doing ourselves a disservice. Black only identifies with the color of our skin but it has no cultural connections to who we are as a people,” said Mitchell, the author of “How Do We Build A Real Wakanda?”

“As a result of our slave experience, we don’t understand the power and purpose of culture and we seem to be naive in how we regard and respect the unifying principles of culture,” Mitchell said.

“Other races of people benefit from employing a language, education, religion, names and customs that are centered around their historical experience and we’re the only people who fail to do so,” he said.

Mitchell said it’s important that all of African descent find time to read books like the “Autobiography of Malcolm X,” “The Mis-Education of the Negro,” “Nile Valley Contributions to Civilization,” and “Chains and Images of Psychological Slavery.”

“We would [then] have a better insight and understanding of culture,” Mitchell said.

Black is the darkest color, the result of the absence or complete absorption of visible light. Since the Middle Ages, black has been the symbolic color of solemnity and authority, and for this reason is still commonly worn by judges and magistrates.

Black was one of the first colors used by artists in neolithic cave paintings. In the 14th century, it was worn by royalty, clergy, judges and government officials in much of Europe. It became the color worn by English romantic poets, businessmen and statesmen in the 19th century, and a high fashion color in the 20th century. In the Roman Empire, it became the color of mourning, and over the centuries it was frequently associated with death, evil, witches and magic. According to surveys in Europe and North America, it is the color most commonly associated with mourning, the end, secrets, magic, force, violence, evil, and elegance.

Black people is a skin group-based classification, which is used for specific people with a mid to dark brown complexion. Not all “Black people” are dark skinned. However, in certain countries, often in socially based systems of racial classification or of ethnicity, it is used to describe persons who are perceived to be dark-skinned when compared to other populations. Depending on the usage, it is mostly used for the people of Sub-Saharan Africa and the indigenous peoples of Oceania, Southeast Asia and India.

Different societies apply differing criteria regarding who is classified as "black", and these social constructs have also changed over time. In a number of countries, societal variables affect classification as much as skin color, and the social criteria for "blackness" vary. In the United Kingdom, "black" was historically equivalent with "person of color", a general term for non-European peoples. In South Africa and Latin America, mixed-race people are generally not classified as "black".[citation needed] In other regions such as Australasia, settlers applied the term "black" or it was used by local populations with different histories and ancestral backgrounds.

For many other individuals, communities and countries, "black" is also perceived as a derogatory, outdated, reductive or otherwise unrepresentative label, and as a result is neither used nor defined. Some have pointed out that labeling people groups “black” is erroneous due to the fact that the people being labeled as “black,” have a brown skin color.

I am black, though for most of my life, I’ve heard from various people that I’m not.

Through it all I have been made to feel as if I no longer fit my birthright.

Life for me began in Cameroon, West Africa. I was 8 when my family moved to the United States. I grew to learn the American culture as I spent time with my friends at their homes where everything was pure American.

 But when you look at my family you will notice we are diverse. From my Filipino aunt and my sister’s Serbian husband, to my extended family in Cameroon. At times it made it difficult for me to accept my looks because no one looked like me, except my twin sister. 

I’ve dated men of different races and ethnicities, which has been great. Though choosing someone within your race can eliminate layers of complication, I don’t think it’s a goal any of us should intentionally set out for. But when you expand your horizons, you’re more likely to surround yourself with an array of enriching individuals, no matter what race they are.

In some cases, the black image in America has been built on stereotypes that categorize people along specific racial lines. Unfortunately, for many of us, these are the kind of stereotypes that many people follow as a guideline to define themselves as authentically black.

It’s a truth that Black-ish, the ABC sitcom, pokes at as it depicts the life of an African-American ad executive, Andre Johnson, who prefers to be called “Dre” as he battles with the uneasiness of his fast-tracking lifestyle and whether sending his four children to elite Los Angeles schools disconnects his family from their black heritage, or, at least, those aspects of black heritage he thinks he’s left behind in the working-class, predominantly black neighborhood where he grew up.

 The more I think about being told that I’m not “black enough,” I begin to realize that I haven’t lost my blackness. I refuse to fall into the common trap. I chose to disassociate myself from stereotypes because they don’t define my blackness. 

The first thing I learned at college was that as a black student I had ruined college for everyone else. Among my cohort of about 3,500 at the University of Missouri at Columbia in the fall of 1997, black students numbered fewer than 300. We were outliers, and to many of our nonblack classmates, we were the undeserving throngs.

Although we didn’t imperil their own admission to the state’s flagship university, we ruined their chances at the colleges that rejected them. We were the villains in every fairy tale about the white student who labored in the classroom, while we idly waited to vanquish their college dreams. We degraded the value of their hard work with our presence and minority scholarships.

And so I was made to feel that I had already taken too much before I even discerned what college had to offer me.

I’ve been thinking a lot about my first year of college in the wake of the admissions-bribery scandal that spanned from the University of Southern California, where I was married at a tiny chapel on campus, to Georgetown University, where I earned tenure and continue to teach. I consider myself the last of the minority-opportunity generation, the students who were brought onto campus to prove that institutions could diversify without radicalizing education. We were offered scholarships and retention counselors in exchange for scorn and contempt.

We were told to be grateful and quiet when we were insulted and blamed. If we were recruited to provide our white classmates with an experience of new and different people, we soon discovered that their parents, guidance counselors, and anti-affirmative-action activists had already told them everything they needed to know.

When the white-racist imagination meets institutional indifference to ending inequality on a college campus, misinformed students create some of the richest fantasies about what students of color are getting and giving. I’ve heard it all: Parents are certain that an unqualified black person led to their child’s rejection from a college. Some of my professors assumed that students of color attend any and all schools for free. I’ve met white people who believed that a spot at an Ivy League school is a salve for dehumanization.

Like any obsessive thought, if a person ruminates on it long enough, they are bound to shout it out. “You only got this because you are black!” “You are just a token!” “Unlike me, you won’t have to worry about anything!” These sentiments followed me to graduate school and linger over my academic career. Sometimes they cast a shadow on my work. Sometimes they merely dimmed my proudest academic moments.

My mentors were the first black and brown people to earn doctoral degrees in their respective universities. I am the first black woman to receive tenure in my department. The students for whom I write letters of recommendation for fellowships and graduate school, who will enter the profession decades after my first year of college, will be among a new group of firsts. At the rate we are going in the academy, they will advise another round of firsts. Hopefully, one day this painfully slow cycle will trigger an actual revolution.

When I entered the University of Pennsylvania as a freshman, in 1970, most people — black and white — thought affirmative action would last 20 or so years; that is, about the length of a generation. Racial preferences would end because blacks would have, to vary slightly an expression the civil-rights leader Benjamin Mays used, “caught up” with their white and Asian peers.

“Catching up” has been designated as the chronic need of the black student, if not always his or her acute or abiding desire. With affirmative action, the American university became the place that would “cure” black students, with the therapy of remediation, of their 12 years of inadequate compulsory education. That the practice of making blackness an advantage in college admissions has outlived its expected expiration date by roughly 30 years can be seen as something of an uneasy, even bewildering, achievement. After all, 50 years since my first undergraduate year, black students are still seen as “needing” affirmative action and still defined by the inadequacy of their education — by the words “gap,” “deficit,” and “disparities.” They are still, in effect, “catching up.” Blacks have been perpetually behind in running the world’s longest race.

The black students I teach now very much resemble the black students I went to Penn with nearly 50 years ago. They try to be both a part of and apart from their university, an odd combination of privilege and inadequacy. The feeling I had during my four years at Penn was “How does it feel to be decorative?” This is not the worst way in the world to feel, but it does make one acutely aware — and sometimes resentful — of the kindness of strangers.

The problem is, both as student and as professor, the tendency to equate hostility or indifference from your white peers with solicitude and warm regard. A certain defensive paranoia incites you to suspect both as expressions of unwelcomeness, one overt and the other subtle. You are at the mercy of an intensified self-consciousness — racial chauvinism and solidarity spiked with a cosmopolitan air — where you try to manipulate how whites see your race, since that is obviously all they do see, because that is why you are where you are.

The continued existence of affirmative action in college admissions — the origin story for the presence of black students and faculty members at the American university — continues for blacks to be a blueprint of frustration. It seems like a social policy that perpetuates the problem that it was meant to solve — a paradox of many well-meant social policies. Blacks remain as stigmatized as they have ever been, recipients as they are of a kind of “foreign” aid. Whites, as the dispensers of largess to the morally and politically deserving, remain in power and are actually the ones who are “entitled,” as they enable the unfortunate and historically persecuted to become their peers.

The effects of diversity — the slogan and ideal that serves as the handmaid of affirmative action — are usually considered only in regard to making white people better, more capacious, more open. What it does for others is to make sure they maintain the intersectional social categories that normative whites need to be better humans. It is an old story about how blacks are meant to humanize whites, a twice-told tale at least. “How does it feel to be a problem?” asked Du Bois. Today that might be paraphrased as “How does it feel to be an intersecting set of categories that diversify society?” or “How does it feel to be an identity?” For in this regard, identities are rather like ornaments on a Christmas tree.

The liberals and leftists who have brought us to this glittering horizon consider themselves good people. And as Barbara Graham so wisely noted just before she was executed, “Good people always think they’re right.” And this is why, in this instance concerning race as in many others, the more things change, the more they remain the same.

As a working-class black woman, I was keenly aware of my race, class, and sex in a sea of mostly white faces and in a space often dominated by men. As a first-generation student, I felt honored to be there but also uncomfortable — worrying that others would look at me and immediately know that I did not come from a wealthy and privileged background.

I had long dreamed of attending an Ivy League school. When I first broached the topic with my mother as a child, she made it clear to me that there was only one way I could get there: hard work and determination.

And so those words became my guiding principles. For as long as I could remember, I was the overachiever who always did more reading than assigned and took it upon myself to get to know my instructors and learn as much as I could from them even outside the classroom setting. During my undergraduate years, at SUNY Binghamton, I was proud to be one of the best students in my graduating class — with a high GPA, publications, and many awards to show for it.

Getting into Ph.D. programs at several elite schools felt like the ultimate reward for the many years my working-class mother had struggled to make ends meet, let alone send me to college. My undergrad professors assured me that I would be fine — I was well prepared to face the rigors of the program, and I would easily be able to keep up with any of my peers.

What they didn’t tell me, however, is that I would walk into a space where my peers would often question my intelligence — and competence. Few people would boldly express these views in front of me, but it was impossible to ignore the surprised expressions when I articulated a coherent thought. With time, I grew to understand why people threw around the phrase “affirmative action” in my presence. They were suggesting that somehow my race, and my race alone, had opened the door for me to attend Princeton. Someone, somewhere, had done me a favor. Otherwise I would not be there.

Looking back at these experiences, I cannot help but consider the irony of it all. Here I was, surrounded by people who had much to critique about affirmative action but very little to say about their own journey to the Ivy League — often precisely because of special preferences.

The practice of giving preference in admissions to those with familial ties to the institution was so commonplace that no one seemed the least bit alarmed by it. To the contrary, many of my colleagues saw it as a badge of honor to identify the many members of their family who had attended the school before them. Still, they attributed their success to “merit.”

Perhaps some found the recent bribery scandal surprising, but black students have always known that those who emphasize “merit” rarely grasp its full meaning.

As troubling as campus conditions are, there is one potential silver lining: Perhaps the recent scandals will compel educators on elite campuses to work to create better conditions that affirm the dignity and respect of everyone there — including those who do not seem to belong.

One thing I will never forget about graduate school was being called a nigger. I was crossing a street just north of Harvard Yard when a pickup truck turned into the crosswalk, nearly hitting me. Pointing to the walk sign, I hollered, “Hey, watch out!” The driver, a white man, replied, “Fuck you, nigger,” and sped off.

Three words threw into sharp relief the boundaries of the university community. As far as I could tell, the driver was not “of” Harvard. He didn’t appear to be a student or a member of the staff or faculty. And yet this incident, and the toll it took on me, speaks to certain realities of campus life.

Over the past few decades, elite universities have slowly become more representative of the country’s racial demographics. At Harvard, for example, blacks and Latinos each make up 10 to 15 percent of recently admitted classes. Twenty-three percent of its faculty members are ­racial/ethnic minorities.

Of course, diversity is no panacea. Students and faculty members at top-tier universities continue to face exclusion. Black students report racism among their peers. And financially poor students — racial minorities and whites alike — report anxiety and institutional forms of exclusion, as documented in Anthony Abraham Jack’s recent book, The Privileged Poor. Among the faculty, underrepresented minorities are more likely than whites to hold adjunct positions, and some feel pressured to assist, without extra compensation, in fixing the very institutional problems they encounter.

Universities are increasingly aware of these issues. Yet they seem less aware of challenges beyond their gates.

Focused on how to cultivate belonging on campus, universities often fail to address injustices in their surrounding communities. The racism I encountered in the street was shocking, in part, because it contrasted with the relative inclusivity of campus. Indeed, the diversity of certain academic spaces can obscure inequalities in their own neighborhoods — and the university’s role in exacerbating them.

Take the case of the University of Pennsylvania. In the 1990s, after decades and dollars spent constructing new buildings in West Philadelphia with little regard for how this development impacted the area’s once-thriving black community, Penn changed course. Partly motivated by worries over growing crime rates, the university invested in “economically inclusive” local revitalization. Over the course of a decade, Penn fixed deteriorated housing, fostered local business development, and incorporated community members in construction projects.

Despite these well-intentioned efforts, revitalization has also meant displacement. Rents have increased, pushing out low-income renters and many African-American families. Consequently, many local residents have been unable to take advantage of community improvements, such as a university-assisted public school whose black enrollment has steadily declined since its opening, in 2001. And with revitalization came stronger institutional ties between Penn and the Philadelphia Police Department, whose presence on the edges of campus has meant safety for some but danger for others.

Brave black souls who venture into mostly white and privileged educational spaces have long known a simple truth: No one escapes without scars.

Even though we black scholars and students, in most cases, have worked hard and overcome significant impediments to get here, maintaining a modicum of dignity means realizing that we may never be fully included at our colleges.

I am a black man who has grown up in the United States. I know what it is like to feel the sting of discrimination. As a middle-class, light-skinned black man I also know that many others suffered (and continue to suffer) a lot worse than me. I grew up around a lot of white people. In elementary school, I remember being told that I was one of the “good ones” – not like the “bad ones” I was meant to understand; I was different.

Obviously, everything I’ve done is because of the help of my sister Venus. But when I started out, I never thought, ‘I want to open up doors for black athletes,’ and then to female athletes. I ended up on this path and people started looking up to me and it was different, because I was like, ‘I’m just doing me.’ And people were starting to appreciate it; I was, like, ‘Wow, OK, that’s kind of cool.’

When did you first realize you were black?

I don’t know. I’ve always known I was black.

I’m gonna tell you when I realized I was black, when I realized that people looked at me differently for being black: My mother took me and my godbrother shopping — we went to a nice little neighborhood — and on the way back we stopped at this candy store. She let me and my godbrother walk in — it was a predominantly white neighborhood — and when we walked in we were getting chips and candy and this little white kid was going ‘b-l-a-c-k, b-l-a-c-k.’ And I felt a little hurt. I was like, ‘Yeah, I am black.’ I had to be about 8 years old, and I guess that’s the moment I realized that some people looked at me different for being black. So was there a point where you realized people look at you different because you’re black?

I do remember one time I was playing, and these kids came up behind me while we were practicing and — I was probably, like, 7 — they were calling me Blacky. [Both laugh.] Me and Venus, they were like, ‘Blacky and Blacky.’ I remember thinking, ‘I don’t really care’ — and that’s pretty crazy to think that at that age.

Do you think some of that sensibility and confidence came from your father and mother? Because both of them are intelligent, strong and they embrace their blackness. So was it something that they instilled in you and your sisters?

As we talk about black people being marginalized and women being marginalized, do you think it’s ironic that a black woman is in the conversation as the greatest athlete ever?

I feel like I definitely was scrutinized because I was confident — I was black and I was confident. And I am black and I am confident. 

Everything black, I don't want black
I want everything black, I ain't need black
Some white some black, I ain't mean black
I want everything black
[x2]

Six in the mornin', fire in the street
Burn, baby burn, that's all I wanna see
And sometimes I get off watchin' you die in vain
It's such a shame they may call me crazy
They may say I suffer from schizophrenia or somethin'
But homie you made me
Black don't crack my nigga

I'm the biggest hypocrite of 2015
Once I finish this, witnesses will convey just what I mean
Been feeling this way since I was 16, came to my senses
You never liked us anyway, fuck your friendship, I meant it
I'm African-American, I'm African
I'm black as the moon, heritage of a small village
Pardon my residence
Came from the bottom of mankind
My hair is nappy, my dick is big, my nose is round and wide
You hate me don't you?
You hate my people, your plan is to terminate my culture
You're fuckin' evil I want you to recognize that I'm a proud monkey
You vandalize my perception but can't take style from me
And this is more than confession
I mean I might press the button just so you know my discretion
I'm guardin' my feelins, I know that you feel it
You sabotage my community, makin' a killin'
You made me a killer, emancipation of a real nigga

[Pre-Hook:]
The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice
The blacker the berry, the bigger I shoot

[Hook:]
I said they treat me like a slave, cah' me black
Woi, we feel a whole heap of pain, cah' we black
And man a say they put me in a chain, cah' we black
Imagine now, big gold chain full of rocks
How you no see the whip, left scars pon' me back
But now we have a big whip, parked pon' the block
All them say we doomed from the start, cah' we black
Remember this, every race start from the black, just remember that

I'm the biggest hypocrite of 2015
Once I finish this, witnesses will convey just what I mean
I mean, it's evident that I'm irrelevant to society
That's what you're telling me, penitentiary would only hire me
Curse me till I'm dead
Church me with your fake prophesyzing that I'mma be just another slave in my head
Institutionalize manipulation and lies
Reciprocation of freedom only live in your eyes
You hate me don't you?
I know you hate me just as much as you hate yourself
Jealous of my wisdom and cards I dealt
Watchin' me as I pull up, fill up my tank, then peel out
Muscle cars like pull ups, show you what these big wheels 'bout, ah
Black and successful, this black man meant to be special
CAT scans on my radar bitch, how can I help you?
How can I tell you I'm making a killin'?
You made me a killer, emancipation of a real nigga

[Pre-Hook]

[Hook]

I'm the biggest hypocrite of 2015
When I finish this if you listenin' sure you will agree
This plot is bigger than me, it's generational hatred
It's genocism, it's grimy, little justification
I'm African-American, I'm African
I'm black as the heart of a fuckin' Aryan
I'm black as the name of Tyrone and Darius
Excuse my French but fuck you — no, fuck y'all
That's as blunt as it gets, I know you hate me, don't you?
You hate my people, I can tell cause it's threats when I see you
I can tell cause your ways deceitful
Know I can tell because you're in love with the Desert Eagle
Thinkin' maliciously, he get a chain then you gone bleed him
It's funny how Zulu and Xhosa might go to war
Two tribal armies that want to build and destroy
Remind me of these Compton Crip gangs that live next door
Beefin' with Piru's, only death settle the score
So don't matter how much I say I like to preach with the Panthers
Or tell Georgia State "Marcus Garvey got all the answers"
Or try to celebrate February like it's my B-Day
Or eat watermelon, chicken, and Kool-Aid on weekdays
Or jump high enough to get Michael Jordan endorsements
Or watch BET cause urban support is important
So why did I weep when Trayvon Martin was in the street?
When gang banging make me kill a nigga blacker than me?
Hypocrite!

Being the most popular forum about black culture on an overwhelmingly white website that hosts a number of racist subreddits has brought other problems, too. There are the white people pretending to be black, and the disgruntled commenters who accuse the moderating team of posing as black themselves.

The forum’s millions of subscribers have been able to stay friendly in the comments on a post about cooking or dating, but if someone mentions a political issue like racial profiling, white people have flooded the comments to say they didn’t see what the big deal was. The problem only got worse if one of BlackPeopleTwitter’s posts was popular enough to make Reddit’s general front page.

This year, the moderators had an idea. What if they figured out who was actually black and then got rid of all the white people?  “I cannot keep quiet about my obsession with Late Night Black People Twitter, an obsession I know some of you other white people share, because it is awesome,” Choire Sicha wrote for The Awl a decade ago.

“Pretty much all our regular users, white, black, or whatever thought it was a great way to bring to light how POC voices are getting lost in the shuffle on a subreddit that’s ostensibly about black people and black culture,” DubTeeDub, who declined to give The Daily Beast any information about themselves, wrote in a Twitter direct message.

Eventually, non-black allies were allowed to apply for verification. A white user posted a picture of himself apologizing for “institutional racism and bland chicken.” 

It is often used symbolically or figuratively to represent darkness, while white represents light. Black and white have often been used to describe opposites; particularly truth and ignorance, good and evil, the Dark Ages versus Age of Enlightenment.
Black ink is the most common color used for printing books, newspapers and documents, as it provides the highest contrast with white paper and thus the easiest color to read. Similarly, black text on a white screen is the most common format used on computer screens.

BlackPeopleTwitter’s moderators had initially planned to keep the experiment going for a week.  By April 2, though, Reddit’s racist white subreddits—many of which have been “quarantined” off from the rest of the site for their hateful content—had heard about the new policy and flooded the moderators with even more racial slurs than usual. They also set up a new racist subreddit, “SubForWhitePeopleOnly,” which was meant to be only for white Reddit users.

“Remember folks, your white privilege entitles you to be blocked from entire Internet forums because segregation is progressive now!” Watson wrote.

In the face of these realities, black people everywhere take note and manage themselves in a largely white-dominated society, learning and sharing the peculiar rules of a white-dominated society in which expressions of white racism are becoming increasingly explicit.

 Long before the election of Donald Trump, black people believed the average white person was against them and their kind
Among their own, black people affirm and reaffirm these central lessons and, out of a sense of duty, try to pass them along to others they care about, and especially to their children.

For black people, experience holds a dear school, and the knowledge they acquire is based largely on the experience of living while black in a society that is dominated by white people.

Therefore, this cultural knowledge is most often inaccessible to white people, and when confronted with it, most white people are incredulous.

When US supreme court chief justice Roger Taney declared in 1857 that black people had no rights that white people were bound to respect, he was observing the social reality of his day. Slavery effectively established black people at the bottom of the American racial order, a position that allowed every white person to feel superior to any black person.

When black people settled in their new communities, their reception was decidedly mixed, but as their numbers grew, local white people worked to contain them. Over time, the lowly position of black people became institutionalized, and passed from racist generation to racist generation.

Thus, black people usually were relegated to the least desirable sections of a city, often “across the tracks” from the white communities, or in the “black sections” of town, the precursor to the iconic black ghetto.

As black people operate in these segregated spaces, they can “be themselves”, away from the direct control of white people. Yet, there is still a general sense that white people and their agents ultimately control the ghetto’s racial reality, notably the financial, legal and criminal-justice systems.

While American society is often ideologically characterized as privileging equal opportunity, the everyday reality of the masses of black people is that of being peculiarly subordinate in almost every way, but this is especially true when they venture into essentially white spaces.

Navigating the white space

But this assimilation is essentially into what they know and perceive as white space, which they often navigate haltingly, and essentially alone.

Yet, large numbers of black people continue to reside in segregated neighborhoods, and their children attend largely segregated schools. When venturing outside their local neighborhoods, particularly into spaces that are overwhelmingly white, they are often surveilled, and at times questioned, harassed, or occasionally arrested by the police – all for essentially “living while black”.

In navigating these white spaces, they may feel themselves to be tokens, as symbolic representatives of the urban black ghetto. When encountering a white person in this setting, they tend to assume that person is likely to be racially insensitive, if not openly prejudiced, and before giving the person full trust, they hesitate.

In the thinking of many black people, it is a highly unusual or even rare to encounter white people who do not share a negative opinion of them and their kind. At the same time, they know and believe there are non-racist white people; they know that such white people exist and may refer to them as “decent” or “good” white people. Here, black people at times see a class divide – they tend to be biased in favor of the well-off white people, those they guess are less likely express prejudice toward black people.

When navigating the white space, black people are typically on the hunt for this type of person, thinking that such people might be supportive and friendly or serve them as allies in their struggles, are likely to understand, or at least are not so likely to exhibit the kind of racial animus against them which they strongly associate with most other white people.

The buying power of the African American community is $1.1 trillion, but it only circulates 6 hours in our community, and the Asians keep a dollar in their community 120 times longer than African Americans. The Jewish keep the dollar in their community for 20 days, and the dollar in the White community circulates 17 days.

Being a 26-year-old black woman has shaped me into the person I am today and has made me be the best woman I can be. “Many Africans who live in North America but were born and raised in Africa do not like to be labelled as Black,” said Dr. Tapo Chimbganda, the founder of Future Black Female, an organization that helps create opportunities for Black female youth to participate fully and beneficially in academic, economic and social endeavors.Then there was that time I was interviewing a young woman over the phone who was startled to learn that I was black.

For black people navigating white space, such allies are critically important, since black folk know there are in fact white people who absolutely hate them but don’t say so to their faces. In fact, a major problem for black people is to figure out which white persons are decent and trustworthy and which ones are covertly racist; they worry about misplacing their trust, as they commonly experience “let downs” and racial setbacks.

Because of these challenges, many black people are suspicious of white spaces and hesitate to invest in relationships with white people they find there. Finding such relations too problematic, they tend to disengage with white people both in public and in private, keeping such relations somewhat superficial.

Given the rigid distinctions between black and white people, black people know very little about how white people actually live, and vice versa.

In fact, profound borders between ordinary white people and ordinary black people have always existed in this country. Since black and white people have lived apart for centuries, their coming together in a cosmopolitan urban society is often a major challenge, and it presents many issues for black people as they move about. Black people tread lightly and exit from stressful situations as soon as they can.

In the white space, white people and others often stigmatize anonymous black persons by associating them with the putative danger, crime and poverty of the iconic ghetto, typically leaving black people with much to prove before being able to establish trusting relations with them. Accordingly, the most easily tolerated black person in the white space is often one who is “in his place”– that is, one who is working as a janitor or a service person or one who has been vouched for by white people in good standing. Such a person may be believed to be less likely to disturb the implicit racial order – white people as dominant and black people as subordinate.

Strikingly, a black person’s deficit of credibility – a function of history of white supremacy, but also their more recent association with the iconic ghetto – may be minimized or tentatively overcome by a performance, a negotiation, or what some black people derisively refer to as a “dance”, through which individual black people may be required to show that the ghetto stereotypes do not apply to them; in effect, they perform to be accepted. This performance can be as deliberate as dressing well and speaking in an educated way or as simple as producing an ID or a driver’s license in situations in which this would never be demanded of white people.

As black people move about the white space, often the first thing they note is the number of black people present. The presence of familiar faces, or simply other black faces, brings a measure of comfort.

Being generally outnumbered by white people, black people feel a peculiar vulnerability, and they assume that other black people understand the challenges of this space in ways that white people cannot. Since the white space can turn hostile at any moment, the implicit promise of support black people sense from other black people serves as a defense, and it is part of the reason that black people acknowledge one another in this space, with the racial nod – an informal greeting serving as a trigger that activates black solidarity in this space.

 Most white people have little idea, and many are willfully ignorant, of challenges black people face in white spaces
First, the strangers’ eyes meet. If both “pass inspection”, mutual nods likely follow, communicating, “I see you.” Those who project negative images of the iconic ghetto will be ignored. This differentiation reflects how today’s black ghetto differs from the ghetto under the rule of Jim Crow. Then the ghetto included upper-class, middle-class and working-class people, as well as the poor. Excluded from white neighborhoods, all black people lived there, as a caste apart from white society.

“While Africans dealt with colonization and many of the same oppressive practices of white supremacy, they were a majority and once their leaders took over government, for the most part, oppression ceased to be about race and more about tribalism and ethnic rivalry,” Chimbganda said.

I’ve heard it from a black man who told me I “act white” based on my music choices and my significant other, who is white. It’s come from a classmate who refused to be my friend after saying my normal speaking voice was fake and therefore I was “talking like a white girl.” I grew up in a predominately white neighborhood in Maine, where there was hardly any diversity. When I started school I was the African girl who could speak French.
The truth is, growing up in a white community was tough, because I stuck out like a sore thumb. My mother married a white man and we inherited his family.
I remember when my friends and I used to take photos and it would be all white people and then me.

 “There are so many ways to be ‘Black’ and so many mixtures and countries that when we define people by a single color, we miss multiple parts of who they are. That is true for Whites as well,” she said.

More than two decades have passed since affirmative action became law, thrusting the issue of racial diversity in the workplace into the open—and often into the crossfire. Today both government statistics and anecdotal evidence suggest that people of color make up a larger percentage of senior managers than at any point in the past. Nevertheless, it remains unclear if the underlying goal of affirmative action—equal opportunity in the U.S. workplace—is being met satisfactorily. Many companies still struggle to increase the numbers of people of color in management. Many still struggle to find ways to leverage the talents of people of color and to make their experience one of inclusion rather than disenfranchisement. And many people of color themselves still struggle with the closed doors of institutional racism—often subtle in its manifestations, sometimes not. Indeed, the infamous Texaco incident, in which executives of the oil company were recorded making overtly racist remarks, was a painful reminder that ignorance and prejudice have by no means disappeared from the U.S. workplace.

And yet there are signs of headway. Kenneth Chenault, an African American, is president of American Express Company and its leading internal candidate to succeed the current CEO. A Mexican American, Solomon Trujillo, is president and CEO of US West Communications; Lloyd Ward, another African American, is CEO of Maytag Corporation. Indeed, the consulting and research firm Korn/Ferry International reports that the number of African Americans and Hispanics in executive positions within Fortune 1,000 companies increased 200% between 1979 and 1989. The flip side of that news: African Americans and Hispanics still make up less than 2% of the total.

The picture of racial diversity in American business, then, is at best a mixed one. But how mixed? Is there reason for optimism, or are most symbols of progress simply that—symbols? Other pressing questions also call out for discussion. What lies ahead? That is, what should American companies do in the future to promote real advances in diversity? Which programs work, and which fail? Who is primarily responsible for changing the picture: people of color themselves or the organizations they work for?

For this seventy-fifth anniversary issue, HBR asked executives on the front lines of the racial experience in the United States to address these questions. In doing so, we continued a tradition that began 40 years ago with the publication of HBR’s first article on race in the workplace, entitled “American Negroes—A Wasted Resource,” by J.J. Morrow (January–February 1957).

What follows is the edited transcript of a roundtable discussion held earlier this year. It was attended by ten senior managers selected because they represent a group seldom heard from or even acknowledged to exist in the media: executives of color. Moreover, by virtue of their authority and leadership, they are as much responsible for the culture, policies, and performance of their organizations as their white peers. The roundtable was moderated by David Thomas, who for the past decade has studied the impact of race on managers’ careers. At the discussion, and in subsequent follow-up interviews, the territory covered was wide but generally coalesced around two issues: How far has American business come in terms of racial equality and inclusion, and what does—and should—the future hold for people of color in business?

Just how far corporate America has come in creating a fair and equal workplace for people of color was among the first topics discussed by participants at the roundtable—and was perhaps the one that generated the most consensus. There has been progress, most participants agreed, but…

But they also agreed that most white Americans still consider effective or intelligent people of color to be an anomaly. A successful person of color is startling—the subject of skepticism. The result: people of color must work much harder to be accepted or devise other methods to make corporate America comfortable with their ideas and actions on the job. Even with their increasing numbers in the workplace, the participants said, people of color believe they are still not considered real insiders, a perception that continues to make inclusion an uphill battle.
Ken Bacon: What I have encountered many times is surprise—surprise that a person of color in authority like myself is the analytical, academic, or intellectual equal of my white peers. I link it to the image of black people that’s presented on television. Every time you see one of us, we are singing, blowing a horn, or dribbling a ball, but we’re not portrayed as businesspeople. So when we are working as managers in real life, it makes people uncomfortable. They can’t believe it.

The media do have an enormous impact. It’s one thing to be in a corporate environment and to deal with the impact of politics, competitive demands, and downsizings on the corporate culture. But the media perpetuate images about Hispanics that create very subtle challenges that can be incredibly hard to tackle. Because of the media, for instance, people are bombarded with images of gangs and poor immigrants, and therefore many people perceive that all Hispanics are the same. In the workplace, there are executives who do not value Hispanics as business leaders because of those stereotypes. These executives have made up their minds even before they get to a Hispanic person’s résumé or qualifications.

It doesn’t even dawn on people that there are a large number of Hispanic entrepreneurs or consumers with strong buying power. The U.S. Hispanic population is larger than the population of Canada; it has an annual purchasing power of $300 billion. And Hispanics represent the fastest growing segment of ethnic entrepreneurs in the country.

Santiago Rodriguez: I don’t know what is expected of us, but it is not success. I remember when I was a child, a teacher telling me, “Oh, Santiago, you can’t be Mexican, you’re too smart!” And that was in front of a class that was 95% Mexican.

Not a lot has changed. Let me tell you what happened at Stanford Business School, which is one of the best, right? When one of the few Chicano professors got tenure, two of his white male colleagues went to congratulate him. “You see,” they said, “affirmative action works.” When in fairness, by any objective standard, he was the superior scholar of the three.

And they weren’t being malicious—and neither was the teacher I mentioned. Like my teacher, those two academics believed they were complimenting the man who had just received tenure. I think that is the biggest problem any of us here have—the assumption that we are not competent. In other words, why shouldn’t we be good at what we do? Because we’re not expected to be good. And from this assumption comes an entire dynamic. You remember the logic of Pygmalion. If you subconsciously expect someone to succeed, they’re likely to do so. The opposite is also true. People of color are often expected to fail—subconsciously. Does that mean they all fail? Of course not, but it takes a unique individual to overcome that expectation. People of color face this pressure every day in corporate America.

To this day, because of my position and my background—an M.B.A. from Simmons College and so on—people still comment to me, “Gail, I just don’t think of you as a black woman,” and I always respond, “Gee, isn’t that strange, because that’s how I think of myself.”

If the preceding stories suggest that many white businesspeople feel uncomfortable with people of color in a professional context, there remains the question of why. Is it because of racism or something less malignant? On this matter, the roundtable’s participants held a variety of opinions.

Maybe because I was an anthropology major in college, I’m very careful how I describe things. Racism? That’s a complicated word. The problem is that people always think of racism as something aggressive and active. Sometimes it is. Sometimes it is very subtle. I mean, I’ve never encountered any situation in which a company’s managers have all been sitting in a room and have decided, “We’re not going to let any niggers in here.” But they may decide not to promote an African American man as early in his career as a white man; they may not take that risk. With a white man, they may say, “This guy has promise. Let’s give him a stretch assignment.” The black man has promise, but he has to prove himself to get the next assignment.

Now sometimes, the fact that people choose to be separate has nothing to do with racism. I regard it as human nature for people to want to be with others like themselves. That’s true for blacks and whites, men and women. If I like hockey and drink beer and you like golf and drink wine, we aren’t going to be spending a lot of time together.

Or say you go to a social gathering at someone’s house and all the men suddenly end up in one room watching the game. Are they all sexist, or are they just bonding because they like watching a particular sport? The same kind of separation can happen between blacks and whites. A distinction has to be made, however, if people are excluding others not because of different interests but because of prejudicial attitudes.

That is a hard call because, as I said, even if there is racism in an organization, it’s very seldom expressed in anything the company does officially. It’s the little things that happen. Like I remember when I was an investment banker. I sat there while an executive asked two associates who worked for me to go out and play golf at his country club—where there were no black members. And I didn’t play golf. But I remember thinking, “He doesn’t know that. He never asked me if I could play.” And a lightbulb went on: I realized these guys were going to be out there together for four or five hours without me, bonding. This is the stuff that I find to be the big barrier. It’s the subtle social stuff that blocks us. It’s the fact that I’ve seldom had a white male mentor during my career. Mainly, my mentors were women. It matters. Because it’s the little social stuff and the mentors—they are what pull you along. When someone invests in you personally, you advance. It has nothing to do with the official diversity policy of an organization. My basic belief is that very few organizations are user friendly, but they are even less so to people of color.

Elsie Cross: You’re not naming the real problem; I want to name it. The problem is the system of white supremacy. Every company contains norms that were built into its culture long ago. It is those systemic norms that create an environment in which a white person doesn’t invite a person of color to the golf course—the white man doesn’t even think about it.

A company is built on informal relationships. Those informal—but powerful—sets of relationships create the tracks that move people into senior management. They determine how senior management feels about people. Informal relationships are all about who feels comfortable with whom: Have I had dinner with this person or attended school with her? Does she live in my neighborhood?

People of color don’t have easy access to these informal relationships. In the eyes of white management, the person of color doesn’t look quite right, or has too much hair on his face, or is too dark skinned—somehow he or she just doesn’t have the right image. And nothing the person of color can do will change that image. That’s how white supremacy functions, and it’s built into all our corporations.

Yes, but it’s an attitude that is so unconscious to most people. Senior management takes white people’s careers and massages them; it sends white people around to get other experiences, but it doesn’t do the same for people of color. They’re not even aware of the double standard—it’s just the way they’re used to doing things. I think racism is the elephant in the middle of the room.

Santiago Rodriguez: We don’t have the conversation about race in the United States—either between groups or among groups. We often have it by race within our own groups. And by the way, brown and black people talk about race a lot more than white people do. White people rarely talk about race, believe me.

We don’t have the conversation about race in the United States—either between groups or among groups.

But is this racism? Probably, but it is also a matter of culture. The point is, American society has a really hard time with the mixture of races. Mixture is a hot button for many people, particularly mixture involving people of African American descent. Why is Tiger Woods, who is part black, part Asian, part white, and part American Indian, always referred to as black? That’s not how other cultures deal with mixture; the Caribbean culture, for instance, is a lot more accepting of it. In Latin America, it is even seen as a benefit. But in the United States, as soon as you have some African American ancestry, you are categorized as black. I have some black heritage, and I have been told I am black. So you can see, the issue of race has very little to do with appearance.

Lou Hoyes: I’m not going to deny there is racism out there, because to state that race has not had an impact on my career would be naïve. But I have also noticed along the way that sometimes whether or not groups mix is a function of logistics more than anything else. In New York, it is very hard to socialize outside the office because of the train schedule and all types of commuting problems. In Miami and Chicago, I knew people of different races who played golf and tennis together all the time. The commuting was easier, and in Miami the weather enabled people to get around easily. Chicago tends to be a city of divisional managers—people on the road to somewhere else in their careers. Everyone is just arriving, so there are no set patterns of behavior. You form your golf foursome from your neighbors. So I’m not ready to say that racism keeps people apart, and that’s all there is to it.
Regardless of the underlying causes of discrimination, some form of exclusion in the workplace had affected the careers of every participant at the roundtable. Interestingly, most worked well within the system to cope with, and overcome, this reality, either by accommodating white expectations about people of color—adapting their own behaviors to fit in with the white world—or by adopting “Teflon” attitudes that helped them deflect doubt and discrimination.

A story told by one participant vividly illustrated the first strategy. In it, Gail Snowden described what happened when her department—which is 45% people of color—wanted to persuade senior management to approve a large commercial loan.

Gail Snowden: We were doing a $3 million deal right after my business unit was formed six years ago. I looked around the room, and it was the first time in my life in which every loan officer who worked on a deal was black. And we were going to the management committee that has to approve all loans above $1 million—which happens to be all white—and we realized, “This is going to be unusual for the committee. Would they be more comfortable with a mixed team?” Because a fundamental assumption in this country is that African Americans can’t possibly be smart enough to figure everything out themselves. That’s sad.

A fundamental assumption in this country is that African Americans can’t possibly be smart enough to figure everything out themselves. That’s sad.

But I was pragmatic. The committee was not used to seeing three or four black folks doing a $3 million deal. It just didn’t compute. But I wanted to get the deal done for my customer, so I did what I had to do. We fielded a team that included a white guy, and we got the deal done. Today, I might add, I would do it differently and confront the issue directly. My unit has a solid reputation now as a good lender. But six years ago, it was new, and perhaps I was too risk averse.

Returning to his story about the golf invitation that was not extended, Ken Bacon described the second strategy of adapting.
Ken Bacon: They came in the next day; they had been out drinking after the golf game until 10:00. I had been working all night. They were tanned and relaxed and laughing together. And I said, “I’m going to learn how to play this game. I’m going to learn golf.” I felt, basically, that if they’re having experiences I want to be a part of, well, I can ask them to accommodate me to some degree. But I also think it becomes incumbent upon the employee to say look, this is the culture of this place. Let me do some things.

John Jenkins: That’s right. I tell young people to take the initiative; nothing is just going to come to us without effort. It’s like what Ken did. Do you want to play golf with other people in the company? Go out and play golf. Go and learn the game if you have to.

I happen to be a tennis player. We have a league. I joined the league. Nobody asked me to join. I saw it as an opportunity. It puts me in the locker room with other guys, and I get to participate in all the small talk that goes on—about what is happening in other parts of the company, rumors, all that stuff.

Now, everyone has a different approach to this. But to wait for someone to come to you and ask you to play golf or tennis is to be the victim as far as I’m concerned. And I will not be a victim.

John Jenkins went on to address the type of attitude needed to cope with the challenges of working in a predominantly white corporate world.

John Jenkins: I’ve always taken responsibility for my career—I sought out mentors all the way. I asked for their feedback, and I made it clear to them that I was open to criticism. Frequently, white supervisors are reluctant to give negative feedback to black employees because they are afraid it will end up in a lawsuit or be misinterpreted as racism. But I signaled that it was okay—I would hear what they had to say, and I would act on it.

I’m not going to say there aren’t differences among people. But I always thought we could celebrate them instead of letting them tear us apart.

My attitude always was, We’re all people. We have things in common. I’ve got kids. I worry about them the same way white people do. I worry about my aging parents the same way white people do. I didn’t fixate on differences. I thought, It doesn’t matter if you are white, black, green, or red, we can all get along. Now, I’m not going to say there aren’t differences among people. But I always thought we could celebrate them instead of letting them tear us apart. I wasn’t going to let the differences among people hold me back or make me resentful.
Can We Talk?





Read More
Other participants also commented on the importance of an unyieldingly positive attitude in their careers.

Ken Bacon: I remember when I got to the Harvard Business School. I said, I’ve been to Stanford, I’ve been a Marshall Scholar, now I’m at Harvard. I can relax. Then I went to work for a large consulting firm for the summer. And I happened to work with a partner who told me I couldn’t write. I said, “But the customer adopted my recommendation. They closed the plant.” But he didn’t care. I was a black man, and he was going to look at me as the glass that was half empty instead of half full.

The experience woke me up. I said, “I forgot—I can’t let down my guard.” I said, “I’m never going to have anybody do that to me again.” So this is what has made the difference for me: I always knew I had to believe in myself, because I couldn’t assume that anybody else was going to believe in me.

Now, I couldn’t be overly confident and tell myself I was the smartest person in the world. But I really had to always have that feeling that I was smart. I would not be outworked. I would not be outsmarted. And if someone didn’t value me, I didn’t get angry about it. I would not get mad. I would not protest. Instead, I would go to work someplace else where I would be valued.

You almost have to feel like Muhammad Ali did: proud and unbeatable. Because that’s the only way you are going to keep going.

I have always tried to keep positive. I really believe that there are a lot of destructive traps out there for people of color. And if you fall into them—if you become angry or vengeful or defeated or complacent—you lose. You know, you almost have to be like Muhammad Ali. You almost have to feel like he did: proud and unbeatable. Because that’s the only way you are going to keep going.
The discussion of coping strategies brought another theme to the surface: how emotionally draining it can be to exist in a near constant state of adapting to another culture’s view of the world, or of having to keep an upbeat attitude in a sometimes hostile environment. In addition, many spoke of the difficulty of bringing one’s whole self—one’s true self—to work, in terms of speech, dress, and other cultural customs. Many said that the most fulfilling and effective coping mechanism in their careers has been joining professional networks—communities of people of color that span companies or industries.

John Arrington: You can’t underestimate the power of professional networks, because when they are positively focused, you no longer feel alone or isolated. You are connected with people of power in the organization in a way you have never been before. Instead of always feeling like an outsider, you feel as if you belong. You are not alone, and that can be tremendously helpful both personally and professionally.

John Jenkins: At Polaroid, we have a group called the Diversity Network Alliance. The alliance is in all parts of the company and includes blacks, Hispanics, and gays, and it’s truly not a senior-management movement. It’s an initiative run by and for the people at every level of the organization. It’s everywhere, and it’s great.

Another thing is that people of color have a buddy-mentoring program for recent hires. They get to meet executives with a lot of influence in the organization. But equally important, they have a chance on a regular basis to talk about their careers with people like them who have been there and know the ropes.

As the participants used personal strategies and networks to cope with discrimination in the work-place, did affirmative action help? Only at the entry level, most agreed. Indeed, the consensus was that affirmative action is a program limited in scope and impact. It began, participants agreed, as a mechanism to overcome prejudice, but over time it has been transformed into a system that some people believe grants unfair advantage and leads to an overall lowering of standards.

Ted Campbell: In some companies, affirmative action has become like the ugly stepchild—something they keep in the basement. Diversity programs, meanwhile, are trotted out to meet the relatives. In practice, they’re the same things. Companies just don’t use those words—affirmative action—anymore. They dig a hole and then bury it, or they dress it up a little and call it something else. The term diversity just sounds sexier and more glamorous. It’s doesn’t sound like a numbers game the government has put you up to.

Affirmative action has become like the ugly stepchild… The term diversity just sounds sexier and more glamorous. It doesn’t sound like a numbers game the government has put you up to.


Ed Vargas: Affirmative action has become like a heart monitor in a hospital. When you’re getting a flat line, you know you’re losing the patient, and you try to put some energy back in the body, shock it back to life. Then you have a body that is not particularly healthy, but at least it’s functioning. That’s how affirmative action is used today.

At least affirmative action keeps tabs on a company’s vital signs. But there are a lot of other things you need to do besides watch for the line going flat.

I wouldn’t say that’s all bad, because you have to have something in place, something that at least keeps tabs on a company’s vital signs. But if you really want to keep a company healthy, there are a lot of other things you need to do besides watch for the line going flat.

John Arrington: It’s true: affirmative action has a role. At least managers know there is some kind of control out there, and they have to pay attention to it. They can’t just willy-nilly hire whomever they like. They can’t have an organization that is not diverse, because looming in the background is the threat that some HR person or their boss is going to come to them and say diversity must be attended to. It cannot be ignored.

So that’s affirmative action’s value. And I wouldn’t be sitting here—and probably many of you wouldn’t be sitting here, particularly if you were hired in the mid-1970s—if not for affirmative action.

Santiago Rodriguez: Affirmative action, to my mind, has been most successful in recruitment—which academics euphemistically call “casting the net widely.” It has been singularly unsuccessful, at least in my experience, in promoting upward mobility—diversification of the upper levels. And remember, affirmative action wasn’t meant to measure the quality of an environment.

Ken Bacon: That’s right. Affirmative action doesn’t do anything for upward mobility, and it doesn’t measure what it feels like to be a person of color working in a corporation.

I’m not sure, though, what would work better. But I do know that if you don’t measure something, it doesn’t count. You measure your market share. You measure your profitability. The same should be true for diversity. There has to be some way of measuring whether you did, in fact, cast your net widely, and whether the company is better off today—in terms of the experience of people of color—than it was a few years ago.

So when people criticize quotas, I say, “I measure my market share and my profitability. Why not this?” It’s not as if I’m sitting around counting the numbers of blacks and Hispanics every day, but if I see a department with 100 people and no people of color, I get concerned. I take action.

The Texaco incident shows what happens when people stop paying attention to the numbers. The senior managers there weren’t dumb. But they didn’t compare themselves with the rest of the industry. Granted, there are not a lot of black petroleum engineers coming out of graduate schools. But if they had looked around and compared themselves to other companies in their industry, they would have seen that their numbers were very low. And they could have asked, “Why are we so much lower?” The answer to that question—a question raised by the numbers—might have led them to learn about the attitudes in their organization.

Most participants agreed that for affirmative action to fulfill its promise, it would need more bite.

Gail Snowden: There’s no accountability in the system. Affirmative action is perceived to be separate from the business. If you make your financial goals but not your diversity goals, well okay, you’ll make them next time.

Santiago Rodriguez: And legally, as you’re suggesting, affirmative action is no more than a good faith effort. Many companies are very good at demonstrating good faith. They say, “We really tried hard,” and they believe they really did.
If affirmative action doesn’t have much of an impact above the entry level in most companies, what can be done to make corporate America reflect the nation’s demography? As the conversation continued, a debate emerged over whether personal initiatives and networks were enough. Should corporate America’s management also shoulder the burden? Yes, said some participants, who attributed the current lack of diversity to corporate America’s racism. Nothing significant will change unless racism is eradicated, this group said, a burden that can and should be borne by white people.

Elsie Cross: It is not effective to work only at the individual level when you are trying to reduce oppression and discrimination in organizations. As a person of color, I can’t expect that having cordial conversations with white people will change the corporation.

You have to look at what happens at the systemic or institutional level. The reason that organizations have to keep returning to this work year after year after year is because they never address it on the institutional level—the belief systems, the norms and the attitudes, the biases and prejudices, and the policies and practices that operate to the advantage of white men and to the detriment of everyone else. If you don’t attack those, then you never bring about fundamental change.

That attack has to be led by the leader of the company: the white CEO. If he is committed—and the CEO is almost always a “he”—change will happen.

Asked later for an example of such change, Elsie Cross cited Terrence A. Larsen, CEO of CoreStates Financial Corporation of Philadelphia. Over the past eight years, CoreStates has invested millions of dollars in the company’s diversity culture-change initiatives. Every employee in the company participates in a three-day diversity-education and awareness-training program. The CEO’s direct reports attend additional seminars and classes. In addition, Larsen released 30 line managers from their duties for nearly a year to commit 100% of their time to making CoreStates a more inclusive environment. Finally, Larsen ties compensation to diversity goals.

Elsie Cross: All of Larsen’s direct reports are accountable to him for progress in the company’s culture-change effort. As in any other important corporate initiative, managers must establish targets and goals, both numerical and behavioral. If they miss their goals, they may not get the bonus or the promotion they expected. That’s very unusual in my experience.

Lots of CEOs say they want change—they want diversity in their organizations. But they don’t understand that there has to be basic change in the culture of their organizations and that they have to make a major financial commitment to accomplish such change. They have to hold people accountable for making it happen, just as they do for any other business goal.

At CoreStates, a very committed CEO has pushed through really monumental change. People of color there feel included; they can be themselves at work. They don’t have to look white or act white. They feel as if their ideas are taken into account. They are promoted, and as a result retention is much higher. And all of these things have had a very positive business impact—CoreStates is one of the most successful banks in the region. But the change there couldn’t have happened without a really focused, passionate CEO who was willing to put his money where his mouth was.

Other participants agreed that a committed CEO was critical to improving the climate of an organization but strongly supported another approach to improving inclusiveness. People of color who have succeeded—rising into the ranks of senior management, for example—must use their positions to act as advocates for meaningful change.
John Arrington: Ultimately, the way to do away with institutional barriers is to get people of color into key positions in the organization, where they can start making the calls—deciding who gets hired and influencing the kind of policies and practices the company is going to have.

Arrington went on to say that this dynamic is already at work in his company to some degree, a point others echoed.

John Arrington:I had a revelation one day: Them is us. We can drive change when we’re in charge. And we have changed the system.

I had a revelation one day: Them is us. We can drive change when we’re in charge.

For example, sometimes we skip the main successor-rating system. We go in and identify talented minorities and women and maybe give them a little extra attention. We give them exposure to the CEO off-line. We provide them with special training. We pull them out of the regular system, sit them down, and talk to them about their careers.

Some people may complain that we are giving preferential treatment. However, I believe that, as it stands, the organization is concerned predominantly with meeting the needs of the majority. You only need to look at the numbers to see that. We’re trying to level the playing field for minorities and women. And once the numbers are more representative, we will be happy to work through the system the majority uses.

Lloyd Trotter: At one point, John [Arrington] and I were critiquing ourselves and asking, Are we really proud of how much energy and skill and strategic planning we have put into helping African Americans in our company? And the answer was no. So we said, Let’s talk about the game, what’s important in the game, and what we can do to redirect people of color so they have a better shot at winning the game.

So we started a group with the senior African American leadership team called the African American Forum, in which people meet on a quarterly basis to talk about the game. What does that mean? It means we talk about understanding who controls your career. The answer is, you do. You say, “My most valuable asset is myself,” and you focus on caring for and feeding that asset.

The second topic the forum addresses is helping African Americans in the company realize that they need to interact with the bigger group—the power group—in a way that says, “We’re here.” That means you go out and actively find mentors for new or rising people of color in the organization—you find sponsors in the power group who are willing to stand up along the way and say, “This person will do a great job if she is given the opportunity.”

We’ve been running this forum for five years. Every year, 4,000 African Americans meet around the corporation, and once a year we have a national meeting where we bring in people from all the businesses and let the networking happen. It’s worked very well.

Here’s another simple change we brought about that made a big difference. We stated, you cannot start a candidate slate without a minority individual on it. And if you can’t find a minority, come see us. It’s amazing how quickly candidate slates became diverse. Really amazing.

By the way, the corporation thought that was a great idea, and all of a sudden it got adopted throughout GE.

John Jenkins: I’ve got a plant manager’s job that’s open. And we’ve looked around the company’s worldwide operations and found there aren’t any black plant managers. We used to have two, but one retired and one was promoted. Now there are none—no black plant managers. And we’ve decided we are going to go outside the organization to find a black person to run this plant.

Is everyone happy with this plan? Obviously not. There are some people who wish the position would be filled with someone from inside the company. They feel as if an opportunity is being taken from them. They’re thinking: That’s a plum job that could have been mine. I understand that sentiment; I’ve had it myself. But the only way we are going to have a truly diverse workforce is if we seize the opportunity when it comes up. A diverse workforce is a goal of this corporation, and it’s not going to happen unless we make it happen.
Even with its variety of opinion on who should take the lead in increasing diversity, the group largely agreed that certain types of “official” programs do work in promoting diversity and that others do not. The ones that work include those that link achieving racial diversity goals to compensation. In short, the most effective programs, the participants said, enthusiastically encourage diversity efforts, measure their results, and then reward those responsible for hitting the numbers.

As for the programs that don’t work, participants offered the following views:

Lou Hoyes: One of the biggest errors is staging high-profile publicity-seeking events. Another is tokenism, as in announcing, “We have x number of women and blacks on the board and one or two black senior executives.” It’s just lip service. All across corporate America you see blacks on boards, but they are just sprinkled there. I mean, you see the same black person on board after board.

In a company that is truly inclusive, when you walk around you see people of color at all levels and in all areas of the company. And when a Texaco-like incident occurs, it is dealt with seriously and immediately. So what I’m talking about is a pattern of deeds, not words.

Elsie Cross: I see a lot of companies having activities to address diversity—I call this approach the activity trap. They might sponsor an ethnic dinner and celebrate Black History Month. They do a lot of symbolic busywork. But they don’t do a thing to change what’s fundamentally wrong within their organizations.

Companies might sponsor an ethnic dinner and celebrate Black History Month… But they don’t do a thing to change what’s fundamentally wrong within their organizations.

Many participants agreed that institutional diversity programs, while useful, are misdirected. They suggested that companies truly seeking a diverse workplace should focus instead on creating opportunities for people of color to make an impact on the real work of the business. Once that happens, racial diversity will make its own case.

John Jenkins: When organizations see that diversity is legitimately good for business, it becomes institutionalized. As long as people see it as something the government imposes, they’re not going to be happy about it.

Sometimes it just amazes me that people don’t see the business argument for diversity. I was reading statistics the other day that show that African Americans buy 30% of the movie tickets in the United States, 20% of the portable television sets, and 32% of all malt liquors. There are many products out there that African Americans buy in greater proportion than their numbers in the total population. And if I were selling one of those products, I sure would want an African American in the room during marketing discussions, planning sessions, and strategy decisions.

I’m not saying a white person couldn’t make an intelligent contribution to the process, but I’m going to bet you—say you take the case of portable TVs—that a white person hasn’t been into a whole lot of black households to know what the people are watching. They might be totally out of touch with the black experience. And I’m not saying that’s bad. It’s reality. I haven’t spent a whole lot of time in Italian households. I’m not going to tell my company how to sell cameras in Italy. We need Italians doing that.

Gail Snowden: I think we have to be able to show that having a seat at the table has a business payoff, that by bringing a different point of view and a different kind of knowledge, you open things up. I’ve seen so many times that having people of diverse backgrounds working together makes conversations so much fuller and richer because there are so many more perspectives—there’s less groupthink. People challenge assumptions and beliefs, and the company ends up benefiting.

I remember a few years ago when we started talking about selling more business to small companies, and the conversations about marketing kept focusing on men. And I said, “Everything I’m reading and hearing and seeing tells me that women are starting businesses at a faster rate than men. Let’s do some research and find out.” It turned out I was right, and we ended up creating a task force on how to serve this market best.

Here’s a great example of how openness to different worldviews makes good business sense. In Caribbean cultures, there’s a practice called su-su. Basically, it means a group—typically an extended family—saves money collectively. Well, banks have been thinking about individual families for a long time—a mother, father, two kids, a dog, and a cat. And they base their lending practices on that model. But in some cultures, the family unit is larger, and it saves money differently. You need to know about that in order to make intelligent mortgage-lending decisions, for example. So here’s a market that most banks probably don’t want to lend to, but actually it is an okay credit risk. There is such a thing as northern European culture, but other groups have cultures, too. And they’re different.

Santiago Rodriguez: If you don’t have us at the table, you get products like the Nova, which didn’t do too well in the Spanish-speaking world. You know—“no va”—no go, in Spanish. Not the best name for a car.
Other participants agreed that diversity was good for business but offered other reasons why racial inclusiveness should be an objective of U.S. corporations.

Lou Hoyes: Increasing diversity is the right thing to do, but not only because it can be financially justified. Every time I hear it described as a market-share issue—as in, we have 20% minority customers so we need minorities in marketing—I just sigh. It’s bigger than market share. Every company today, to succeed, has to bring in the best and brightest minds. I don’t know who is going to cure cancer. I don’t know what color, shape, creed, or gender that person is going to be. Why limit the opportunity to bring that person into my company? If Colin Powell had not been allowed into the army because of his color, the whole country would have missed his leadership.

Every time I hear diversity described as a market-share issue—as in, we have 20% minority customers so we need minorities in marketing—I just sigh. It’s bigger than market share.

Ken Bacon: I also don’t particularly see this as a marketplace issue. Sure, diversity can be good for business. But I see this as a moral issue. Business has been able to thrive in this country because it reflects American values. Capitalism has given people freedom; it’s given them hope. And when hope dies, people feel resentment, and that’s bad for civilized society. Frankly, I think businesses should be able to say, we are made up of good people. For example, some people won’t work for tobacco companies because they think selling that kind of product is wrong. It has nothing to do with dollars and cents. And neither does diversity for me. It’s just about doing the right thing.

Yet even if corporate America were to embrace the cause of racial diversity, many participants at the roundtable noted that businesses do not exist in a vacuum. They are part of a society that as a whole has yet to address the problem of racial inequality adequately.
Lloyd Trotter: I firmly believe that you can’t fix corporate America without fixing the neighborhoods that surround corporate America. Nothing is going to get fixed unless the whole U.S. structure is changed—you can’t have an environment outside the office door that is hostile to African Americans and then expect to walk into a fantasyland for eight hours a day. Society’s baggage comes with us.

Santiago Rodriguez: My heart breaks when we try to recruit. What do you do in electrical engineering and computer sciences when the colleges and universities are graduating maybe 2% African American and Hispanic students in those fields? There is no way you can get around that fact.

Asians make up 15% of the workforce in those fields, and women now probably make up 25% of it. But the African American and Hispanic communities continue to be a disaster in terms of producing the talent. In both these communities, we’re losing two-thirds of our kids. We don’t even get far enough with them to worry about affirmative action in corporate America. We have to get back to what is going on in these communities and give help where help is needed.

Ted Campbell: I’m working with a group of college students in New Hampshire, mentoring them, helping them understand the system—what you do, what classes you take, where you work. And they are raw. Nothing has really prepared them for school or careers. It makes me realize we have to start sooner, catch them in high school and junior high, because they don’t have a lot of support in their neighborhoods to help them survive in the working world. There’s a crisis out there that is larger than what we’re talking about in this room.

Finally, as the roundtable discussion came to a close, participants were asked to reflect on the course of their careers. “If you knew then what you know now, what would you do differently?” Some of the participants answered that they had no regrets. Ted Campbell spoke for many in saying that he had surpassed the wildest dreams of a child born of deep poverty in a country entrenched in racism. There had been struggles along the way, but they had been only a small part of an unexpectedly successful journey to the top of the U.S. business world.

But another answer was more common. I would have challenged the system more, and earlier, many said. In other words, I would have been less patient. I would have risked more.

Gail Snowden: I would have tried to work less within the system. Because even with the best intentions at my company, which has diversity as a core value and a CEO who is a real leader on this issue, we still do not have many people of color in very senior positions. I would have pushed harder. But I was trying to play internal politics, trying to advance my own career goals while at the same time advancing the issue of diversity in general. I was trying to balance my role as an advocate with my role as a corporate citizen.

I always thought things would get better. I had a lot of hope. I certainly hoped that when my daughter was ready to seek employment, she wouldn’t have to face the same things I did 30 years ago. But she did. People still asked if a black person could be smart, if she could write and speak well. So that leaves me thinking, I should have pushed harder along the way.

On the other hand, when I see a person like me, I know that progress has been made. But it’s still an uphill battle.

John Arrington: When I walk around my company, people are still surprised to see a black face—and we have a Hispanic president. And there are still areas of the company I can go into where there are no minorities to speak of. Now, it’s not like ten years ago when I was a labor relations specialist in Vermont, and in a plant of 2,500 employees there were two people of color. Changes are happening or I wouldn’t be here. US West now has five or six black officers. But I’m waiting for the day when people don’t look up when I walk by. I’m waiting for the day when I’m not an oddity.

Lloyd Trotter’s closing remarks spoke for many at the roundtable in their mixture of hope and dismay about the future of race in the U.S. workplace.

Lloyd Trotter: When I entered corporate America in the 1970s, the playing field wasn’t very level. There were very few people who would accept you based on the skills you brought to the table.

Along the way, I think I underestimated how hard it would be to get a company to a level playing field. I look around today, and I see the issues are still there. And so the only thing I would have done differently is to have hit the walls harder and faster and faced the issues a lot quicker.
I know no one is going to cry for me… But there has been too little change for the length of time that the struggle has been going on.

There have been successes. There has been change. When I look at companies like GE and when I look at corporate America, I know that is true. I know no one is going to cry for me: I’m a CEO at GE, and there are only 12 of us. Most people would argue that I haven’t been discriminated against or I wouldn’t be here. They would argue: You’re a success story. We all are successful, all of us at this table. But there have been too few successes and there has been too little change for the length of time that the struggle has been going on.

We’ve been at this a long time.

Exogamy remains much less prevalent among African Americans.
Only a small percentage of African American employees were considered for promotion.
Ralph Ellison is a famous contemporary African American writer.
America has many dialects, especially the midwestern, southern, African American and Spanish dialects.
Currently, 82 percent of African American women and 75 percent of Mexican-American women meet the criteria for being overweight or obese.
Jesse Owens an African American athlete who won four gold medals in track-and-field at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin and put to shame Hitler's Aryan superiority message.
7Private company, traders, suppliers, distributors for African American, Asian & European companies.
Chicano, African American, and Asian American theater, taking into consideration the historical and political context for the creation of these works.
Many expressed at the election of the first African American president.
Hayden was an African American poet who managed, in this brief epic, to bring the slave trade into lyrical focus with a polyphony of voices.
Senator Obama is the first African American to be elected U.
African American men granted the right to vote in the District of Columbia.
African American writer Ralph Waldo Ellison and his novel Invisible Man always come to the front when one looks through the twentieth century American literature and the world literature.
The 46-year-old first-term senator is the first African American to become the presumptive presidential nominee of a major American party.
Some African American men say they have been pulled over when driving a well-kept expensive car, just so officers could see if it belonged to them.
An obvious example often occurs with African American children who are exposed to Ebonics at home and who are expected to use standard English at school.
U.S. President Barack Obama is honoring Martin Luther King Jr. during a national holiday celebrating the life of the slain African American civil rights leader.
Obama said he did not take the remarks personally, but called them "historically inaccurate"[sentencedict.com], citing past African American presidential candidates like Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton.
The summary: we take interest in hardship when it's White hardship, yet accept it without notice when it's endemic to the African American community.
You have new methods now being brought back into seminary education, like feminist analysis,or literary criticism, or liberation theology,or African American approaches, or Latino approaches.
Following the U. S. Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954), African American and white supporters attempted to end entrenched segregationist practices.
America English has many dialects, especially the midwestern, southern, African American and Spanish dialects.
Alison's father Hank is bi - racial himself -- African - American African American and white.
In A-HeFT trial, you showed a combination of isosorbide dinitrate with hydralazine achieved a better survival rate than placebo in African American population.
Now the master of syncopation, of course, in music was Scott Joplin, African American composer writing a lot around the area of St. Louis in the turn of the twentieth century.
Today the cold war was long over. we elect an African American as United States president.
Tony Burroughs, a genealogist who wrote Black Roots: A Beginners Guide to Tracing the African American Family, cautions people to avoid jumping straight into DNA testing.
Interview Date: 4-18-13
Interviewer: Tonisha
Students: Amber, Jesse, and Jerome
Length: 34:07
Transcript Date: 10/1/13
Transcriber: Christy Byrd

I: Ok. So, I am Tonisha and I'm working with--on this project with Dr. Christy Byrd. Um, and thank you all again today for being here. As you may have been told, we're doing a study on how teenagers see race in their schools. Race is something that we may think about a lot, or not at all, or somewhere in between. And people think about race in different ways. Even adults don't agree on what race is or how we should talk about it. We want to know how you all think about it. Um, and there are no right or wrong answers here. And we want you to share your point of view even if it's different from someone else's. So sometimes it's uncomfortable talking about race, so let's try to make it as comfortable as possible by paying attention when people speak, and also by being respectful if you disagree with someone. So, you know, if you disagree, just keep it respectful and give your counterargument. So it's ok to disagree because, like I've stated, a lot of people don't agree on some of these things. Um, remember that everything you will say will be completely confidential, that's why we're using the fake names. Um, and you can stop at any time that you want. And let's start by introducing ourselves. And so give me your name and your grade. The name you just made up.
Amber: My name is Amber and I'm in the 10th grade.
Jerome: My name Jerome and I'm in the 10th grade.
Jesse: My name is Jesse and I'm in the 11th grade.
I: Ok, great. So let's start out by talking about what race is. On your paper, if you could write a definition. How would you define it, doesn't have to be like a dictionary definition but just what you think. And then we're going to share our definitions. [short pause] Here's a--you can use that one.
[long pause as they write]
[00:02:15]
I: And when you're finished you can just look up. [long pause] Ok, so um, we can just start by giving our definitions. What do you have, Jesse?
Jesse: Um, I just put like colors, cultures. Places where people come from that might be different from somebody else’s.
I: Ok.
Jerome: I put your background and the color.
I: Ok, how about you?
Amber: Um, your race is the way you're born, the color of your skin.
I: Ok. Um, so where did you learn your definitions of race? Like, where did they come from?
Jesse: Uh, like, you know, usually when somebody refers to race, they refer to somebody's color, or if like they're Latino. I mean, they call black people black when in actuality we're brown, but when they refer to like black, they mean African Americans and Latinas, like Mexicans and stuff like that. They usually, it just means where somebody comes from, their culture and stuff.
I: Other people want to talk about where you got your definition from?
Amber: Um, I actually got it from...um, U.S. history and learning about segregation and all that stuff.
I: Ok. And what were some of the things you learned about segregation in that class?
Amber: Um...hmm, I learned about Hitler and...stuff I can't remember right now. [laughs]
I: Ok.
Amber: But, uh I learned...really important stuff that I really should be able to remember but I don't.
I: Ok. Is--is that a class you're taking this year?
Amber: No.
I: Ok, you took in the past. Ok. Cause I might ask you think about that class a little bit more in the conversation, so. Um, so now that we've talked a little bit about race, what race is everyone here? Like, how do you define yourself or identify yourself?
Jesse: Um, African American.
Jerome: African American.
Amber: African American.
I: Ok. And I noticed that none of you used black. Is there a difference? I know you, Jesse, kind of talked about we're actually brown, not black. But is there a reason why the rest of you used African American over black?
Amber: Because we’re really not black. Like black--
Jesse: When you think about—yeah, go ahead.
Amber: When you think about black, you think black, like...hm, the color of your recorder is black. And we're not black, we're brown. So, African American. It's culture.
I: And you also touched your hair, which is...black.
Amber: that's part of being black.
I: Well, I didn't know if you were saying--suggesting that your hair color is black.
Amber: It is, yeah.
I: Ok.
Jesse: Yeah, I was just talking about this with my mom yesterday since the class, like what you were bringing up. She was saying like how, you know, people always describe black people--something bad or dark or evil as black. And...not, we're not--as a race we're not evil or bad. Or…so brown, or African American.
I: So are there ever examples where black is a positive thing?
Amber: Yeah!
I: Go ahead.
Amber: Harriet Tubman, um, well...and um, this one thing I just learned about in English. It's about 4 guys, Tom Robinson case or something.
Jesse: To Kill a Mockingbird?
Amber: Huh?
Jesse: To Kill a Mockingbird?
Amber: Yeah. The Tom Robinson case. Um, he got arrested for…quote unquote raping a white woman, and he really didn't and it was really a white man who raped the white woman, so he [00:05:40] a black person.
I: Ok.
Amber: And Martin Luther King, and blah, blah, blah. The list goes on.
I: Blah, blah, blah? [Amber laughs] Who else is on the list? Who are other positive examples of black people?
Amber: um...Rosa Parks...Michelle Obama...Beyonce. 
[all laugh]
I: Ok. Ok.
Jerome: And sports.
I: Ok, what about sports?
[background noise]
Jerome: Like Kobe Bryant, example. Lebron James, Michael Jordan. Number one NBA player.
I: But going back to some of the points Jesse was making about black being evil or associated with negative things. Are there other things that we could point to, I don't know, that's black but associated with positive, besides people?
Amber: Associated positive with black. See, that's hard because it's not a lot of stuff--wait! I’m sorry, can you repeat the question again?
I: Are there positively associated images or objects that are associated with black besides just people?
Jesse: The word black?
I: mmm hmm.
Jesse: Uh...
Amber: Anything positive?
Jesse: That's uh...
Amber: You mean like outfits or something?
I: I don't know. Jesse said that a lot of times when we think black, we think evil, dirty, negative.
Jerome: [00:06:51]
I: So are there ever times that black is associated with--just black itself the color, associated with--
Amber: Maybe--
Jesse: Little black dress.
Amber: You said little black dress?
Jesse: Little black dress. 
Amber: Yeah, I was about to say that. Or black hair, the way you have your black hair styles, or your nice black shiny shoes, or anything.
Jesse: Yeah, our hair, sometimes you'll meet that occasional person with a different kind of hair just like "oh my gosh, how did you get it like that?"
Amber: Or, for example, if you're doing a performance in dance for example and you guys start off in all black. It's a really good performance. Positive.
Jesse: Do you mean like, as a black person, something about us that people…oh wait, you mean the word black, right?
I: Yeah, because you were bringing up some interesting points about how the word black is associated with negative things--
Jesse: Yeah, [00:07:35]
I: And so often people in the United States may not call themselves black because of the negativity, and so they usually say African American?
Jesse: I mean no--
I: And so I was just wondering if you all knew of positive examples.
Jesse: It's not even--usually people say black, because for some reason, all African American people have yielded to that standard, like ok, we're black, they said we're black so now we're black. When in actually, it's our skin is brown.
Amber: [00:7:59] --I'm black. I mean African American. [girls laugh]
I: Ok. 
Amber: Well, white people say white. Or Caucasian.
I: is there a difference between white and Caucasian?
Amber: Your culture is Caucasian and your color is…not even white, it's like pale. Well, not even pale, like--
Jesse: That's---
Amber: Like cream? [laughs]
Jesse: That's something we all--we created as a people. We did that. We didn't start--we didn't come in and say Caucasian or nothing like that. They decided that black--black people, or African Americans, and white people, or Caucasians, were the opposite like the yin and yang thing, good and bad. So they just put it into that group like, you're black, you're bad--this is--I'm talking about years and years ago. You're black, your skin is dark. You are different than I. I am white, and I am good and I am pure.
I: Mmm hmm.
Jesse: That's what [00:08:50]
I: Mmm hmm. And I'll be writing down things as you all say it, not to necessarily document your language but just to remind myself questions that I have. Because you, um, brought up a point about, um, “we” decided a long time ago or “they” decided a long time ago. Can you talk a little bit about who those we's and they's may be?
Jesse: The--this is going to sound bad, but like--
I: Just say it.
Jesse: The white folks, the Caucasians. Cause, you know…they've had the upper hand for like--
Amber: God knows when.
Jerome: Starting from slavery.
Jesse: Yeah, it [00:09:24] It was before slavery, you know they go in, they take people's countries. All of, like…you have African people, White African people. The only reason you have, like, in South Africa, White South African people because people came there and took over these people's lands, like the whole apartheid thing. You coming in and you taking over their land and saying that separate but equal...and stuff like that. A whole bunch of different countries you know, white people just--it's not even about black and white. It's everywhere. Mostly the face of taking over, and destroying, pillaging, it's pale skin. [quieter] That sounds bad.
I: Um, where did you learn some of these things that you're speaking of?
Jesse: I don’t--my mom just loves to play the race card. Everything--every time something bad happen, "It’s the man trying to hold us down" or you know, I just look--you observe. Look at the world.
I: But these aren't necessarily things that you were taught in school, about apartheid and...
Jesse: No.
I: All of these things you named. How do you all feel about things that Jesse has said? Are those things that you've heard or agree with, or disagree with?
Amber: Uh, I think she's absolutely right, and these are things that I've heard before. I just wish I could remember what I did hear. [laughs]
I: [laughs] That's ok. Whatever you can remember, definitely tell us about it.
Amber: Um, I do think she's right.
I: What about you Jerome?
Jerome: Uh, I have heard some of these things before that Jesse has said. Yeah, like I mentioned slavery. That started. How the whites treating the blacks. [short pause] Stuff like that.
[end of part 1]
I: And are these things that you all ever talk about in school? Even if it wasn't this school. Like, are these subjects that you've talked about in school and how whites treated blacks historically or today, or?
Amber: Yes.
Jerome: Yes.
Jesse: It's so brief. Like, we don't even do black history month this year. Like, I don't think we did anything.
Amber: We sang.
Jesse: Yeah..
I: What did you all sing?
Amber: Oh, Christmas carols.
I: Y'all sang Christmas carols for Black history month?
Jerome: That was around Christmas time, I think.
Jesse: Yeah, I can't even remember what we did for Black History Month.
Jerome: I don't think we did nothing.
Jesse: I think that the whole, the administration as a whole is just so focused on uniting everybody that they forget to celebrate each individual culture, or at least bring, you know, shed some light on it, shed some light on the history of each culture. Cause we have…we got a...you know, Latinas, African Americans. We got a few Caucasians in this school, but you know, people, we forget to, yeah, they forget to recognize everybody.
Amber: I think--this year, I have talked a lot about race.
I: You have this year?
Amber: Mmm hmm.
I: And where, where did you talk about these things?
Amber: In English class. Uh...
I: Can you tell us about what was being said?
Amber: I was talking about the whole To Kill a Mockingbird. We talked about this Tom Robinson case in a book by Harper Lee called to Kill a Mockingbird and it talked a lot about how white people were racist down in the South, around the whole Alabama area. And how they were being, um, racist toward black people even though...some black people were evil and mean--there was other ones who were really good but would get blamed for doing things but really white people did it. But the white people were scared to say something because they knew if they lied they would get shot or something so instead they lied on black people. So they had them thinking that black people were all mean and evil, or whatever. And, um, I just learned about--a lot how they used to treat them. And this one white guy in the book used to carry around a bottle with a paper bag over it and pretend like he was drinking alcohol, like saying he was drunk but in reality he wasn't, he was just drinking Coca-Cola. But he just didn't want all the attention from--and he would hang with black people, but he didn't want all the attention from the white people about how he hang with black people because if he really hung with black people and he wasn't drunk, they'd probably kill him.
I: And all of this happened in the book?
Amber: Yep.
I: Oh, ok.
Jesse: You know, I actually read of that book with my sister last night.
Amber: I read the whole thing.
Jesse: I mean, I've seen the movie many times but I've never read the whole book. I did read this one part, though, uh, you know the teacher, the teacher in the book, the little kid's teacher, she was like--
Amber: Oh, yeah.
Jesse: All that stuff, because this took place in the forties, right, all that stuff that Hitler was doing was ridiculous--it's out of
Jerome: Oh, yeah.
Jesse: It's out of line, I'm so against Hitler. But then, the girl--Scout, the girl in the book, she said she was telling her dad and her brother about how one day, the same lady who said that he was wrong for how he was treating the Jews and...all of that. She was talking about Tom Robinson like, oh, he thinks he's equal, they're not equal and--she was racist! She was basically saying somebody was bad for being prejudiced, but being prejudiced, she was prejudiced herself.
Amber: And her sister got really mad at that and she was telling her not to ever talk about it again because...um, she didn’t like to hear that, and one day they were at the trial and during the whole Tom Robinson case, their little brother or friend started crying, because he understood how white people were treating black people and he didn't think they should be treated that way. And he only like--he's only like six or something.
I: Mmm hmm. Now thinking about--since some of you may be familiar with the book--now some of the things that you mentioned from the book that things were blamed on black people by whites that didn't really happen or they were treated unfairly. Do you think some of those kinds of things happen today in society?
Amber: Not that I know of, or ever seen before.
I: What about you all, do you ever feel that people get treated unfairly or get wrongly accused because they're black or…another race?
Jesse: I kind of feel like---I feel like we are still treated unfairly, because I—I don’t feel like we’re…I just don't feel like we, uh, well, we live in Detroit and you know, the crime rate here is...yeah.
I: Is what?
Jesse: It's pretty uh… it's out of control.
I: OK. 
Jesse: It’s crazy in the D. But um, I feel like the police, the police are very, very slow responders because, you know, of all the stuff they have going on. And, I understand that, but...I just--I don't know, like white people here sometimes, the ones, like not the ones that was raised, you know, within the city but the ones on the out--the outside, like even some of the---
Amber: Like Bloomfield?
Jesse: Huh?
Amber: Like Bloomfield or something?
Jesse: Like even some of the Arab people are just like, they treat us differently. Like they're--like, you can feel it. You can tell.
I: So, um, you said some of these people treat us differently. Do you ever experience any of that, Jerome?
Jerome: Uh, yeah.
I: Being treated differently or seeing other people treated differently?
Jerome: Yes, like, uh, gas station…like uh, when blacks walk in Arabic gas station, you could see how they be looking and stuff like, like we goin' steal, like...cause uh I guess the name out there for black people we just steal, thieves and stuff. So when you walk into the gas station, makes you feel uncomfortable sometimes cause the owner, whoever the cashier is, he just be watching you, staring at you. But then you see another Arabic guy walk in, he ain’t goin to watch him as much as he watch as black man. Cause he--I guess he think we goin’--a black person goin' steal.
Jesse: I think that they assume that we're ignorant or something. I’m still talking about the Arabic people.
Amber: [00:06:06]
Jesse: It's a lot of those around here, and they just assume that we don't--
Amber: Sorry.
Jesse: Like I, uh, I have a Arab--I have a few Arabic friends and they taught me the--the word in Arabic for, you know, the N-word. And you know, I hear it a lot. I hear it a lot more than you would think, cause you know, I live really close to Dearborn, which is where all the Arabic people live. And it’s--the word is "abit." It's like…I hear it a lot. So...yeah, I think they have a thing against black people. Not as a whole race, but a lot of people.
I: You were going to say something, Amber?
Amber: Uh, actually, uh, I was researching...something, I can't remember. And, now that you call my name, I forgot what I was about to say.
I: Oh, ok. Well, if that ever happens then just take an ink pen and write it down and then, you know, if we don't get back to you soon enough you can just tell us. Um, earlier the comment "playing the race card" was mentioned. Can anyone tell me more about that? Like, what is "playing the race card"?
Amber: Oh! I'm sorry. I remember now.
I: Ok, well we'll come back to the race card.
Amber: Um, I was watching a movie and it was called, I am a Slave and it was a black girl on the front.
I: Was that in school or somewhere else?
Amber: No, it was--it was on Netflix at home. [laughs]
I: Oh, ok. But, I was watching it and this movie I figured out that there are still twenty-five thousand something slaves in London.
Jerome: Whoa.
Amber: Now.
Jesse: In London?
Amber: In London. And, I didn't know about that until I see the movie so at the end I was like, dang, somebody need to get to London to free all these people. And when she got free, she came from Africa, and her dad came all the way from Africa looking for her. And when she finally got free and she finally see her dad, or she talked to him on the phone from Africa, and it was just like, um, I didn't know that, like cause, I don't like ever see a lot of racism here or any slaves or anything like that here, cause I don't think that's allowed here, I think it's a law or something.
Jesse: Should be a law.
Amber: But people still do it.
I: I think it's a law, yeah.
Jesse: People definitely still do it, you just have to figure it out.
Amber: When I seen that...They're still doing that in London. 
Jesse: Here! [short pause] They like, do--they have, uh, trafficking people from Africa to work, in like, you know, the braiding shops. Those people don't be speaking English because, you know, they get them here and they do the stuff for real cheap and...yeah, they still do that.
Jerome: But that's really not slavery.
Amber: But they living with White people.
Jesse: No, they have actually slavery, like, they have people come, like taking kids from Africa, bringing them here, telling them that they going to let them be free in America cause, you know...this is the land of our dreams or whatever. And they don't. They like, traffic—they traffic these people, sell them to other people and these people think, like that--sorry--that that's acceptable because they don't really know, here. But yeah, they still do that. It's crazy.
I: And why did you say that's not slavery?
Jerome: Because I thought she said that, uh, when they bring the people over here to do hair and stuff, I thought she said they pay them.
Jesse: No, but they be--no, they don't pay them. They be having them sleeping in those shops--the hair shops. They have them sleep in there at night and stuff. I have, you know, witnessed something like that before. But that's off-topic, so...let's get back to it.
Amber: Um, and when I seen this movie, uh, the Black girl that was working, she was in the house with a whole bunch of white people, and she had a bond with some of the white kids that were in the house, or her kids, the white lady's kids. And the white lady eventually stopped letting her play with her kids because she had a bond with them, I guess she got jealous. Because she was black but she didn't want them to think that you can have a black mother or anything like--she was completely racist about the whole thing. And, um...I just wanted to say that on the little recorder thing, so that whenever you let somebody hear it they can understand. So they can do something about it. [laughs]
I: Oh. Maybe. Um...so did you ever share that example with--in any of your classes, since you all have talked about similar issues?
Amber: I shared it with one person, but not in school, no. Not until now.
I: Mmm hmm.
Amber: Never give up.
[end of audio part 2]
I: Ok, um another term that people may talk about when, you know, talking about this kind of race and these kind of trends or issues. Another term that's often used is diversity. What does the word diversity mean to you all?
Amber: Difference. Maybe? 
Jesse: It's like...I don't know, I just, when I think of diversity, it's just everything is so beautiful when you think of it, like...to just be able to be around people. You can learn so much from being with somebody of a different culture. Like, Bengali's, Caucasians...we just, everybody has something to contribute to society. And I think it's beautiful.
Jerome: I don't know.
I: You don't know? OK, another term. What about culture? What does that word mean?
Amber: Your background or where you come from, maybe, or what you do and your culture. It's hard to give you a definition with your word in the definition. [laughs]
I: Yeah.
Amber: But um...yeah, I think that--
I: But one of the things you mentioned was background.
Amber: Yeah.
I: Did anyone else want to add anything to the definition of culture?
Jesse: It depends on what you think about when you say culture. Like, African American culture, there are good and bad things associated with our culture. Like, there's stereotypes, and there's good things. People always assume we love chicken and Kool Aid, and watermelon and stuff like that. And...that all black and, like--I feel like...that's the culture that they've given us, that some people have given us, but in actuality we have stuff like...
Amber: We have family occasions, we eat soul food all together at the table as a family.
Jesse: Yeah, we...Yeah.
Amber: We do a lot of family things.
Jesse: And, do you--do you just want from a black background, or do you?
I: Or just in general. Just when you hear the term culture what do you think of?
Jesse: Culture is like...pertaining to ethnic group, culture is like the background of your people, what traditions you have, what traditions you keep until this day. And stuff like that.
I: Now you mentioned ethnic groups. Can you define what that means?
Jesse: Ethnic groups. Like different people pertaining to like, area. What area are you from. What, like, what language you speak. What things that you're, like, you know, like Chinese people, Indian people, stuff like that.
I: Ok. So is there a difference between race and ethnicity or ethnic groups?
Jesse: Yeah, I feel like there is. Like…race is heavy on color, to me, and ethnicity is like...just culture.
I: OK. So, um, Jerome, what do you learn about different races and cultures in this school?
Jerome: Uh...let's see...[long pause]
I: And if you want to take time to think, other people can jump in about what, like do you learn here?
Amber: Well here, I think we definitely come together because there's a lot of Mexicans and a few white people. And, we're not racist toward them or anything. We treat them just like us, mainly because they probably, well--we all act alike.
Jesse: We been around. This is our area. We all from the same area.
Amber: And this area, um, in particular is like Southwest [Detroit] where all the Mexicans live. And we're kind of like in their area, so we all get along.
Jesse: I mean like, you know, Detroit.
Amber: Yeah.
Jesse: Wait, do you live in Detroit?
Amber: Yeah!
Jesse: Ok. Yeah--this whole, it pretty much everybody. we all listen to the same thing. Well, you know, not everybody, but for the most part, people listen to the same thing, people wear the same kind of clothes. People like to do the same kinds of things, so it's easy to accept somebody.
Amber: People all--well, most people go to the same places.
I: But regarding your school, like are there certain, I don't know, bulletin boards that's put up or assignments or programs that's established to help you all learn about different cultures and races?
Jerome: No.
Amber: Not that I know of.
Jesse: Yeah. They don't focus on--this is not that, I don't feel that this is that kind of school. They don't focus too much on race at all.
Amber: It's not like a Catholic school or anything.
I: Mmm hmm.
Jesse: It's...I don't know.
Amber: Or even a culture school. I feel like if you did go to a culture school, they probably would, but not here.
Jesse: They try to--
Jerome: We rarely even talk about race in this school.
Amber: Yeah.
[short pause]
I: But it seems like the issues do kind of come up, because of the book that you were telling us about, like that book is definitely--To Kill a Mockingbird definitely brings up race related stuff--
Jesse: But you know what, yeah!
I: And I know you all have talked about segregation and history, so.
Jesse: And you know what, and some [04:32]
Amber: Well, every now and then, but it--it probably up so often, every so often.
Jesse: We've definitely been lingering on that in my English class.
I: Mmm hmm.
Jerome: Well, I know 9th grade year, Mr. Marcoux class? We talked about racism a lot. Because that’s when I read To Kill a Mockingbird.
Amber: That's the class I took.
Jerome: And that book was about, like, racism. That's what Amber and Jesse was talking about.
I: Mmm hmm. Was that teacher white or African American? That you're saying--
Jerome: White.
Amber: White.
I: And so, do you remember some of the things that he said about the book or that you all discussed regarding racism?
Jerome: Uh, yeah, that the black man, Tom Robinson was accused of raping a girl. Yeah.
Amber: A White man did it.
I: So similar to some of the things Amber was saying?
Jerome: Right.
I: All right, so I want to talk to you all about how different races get along at this school. So, um, you know, and thinking about students with each other and also teachers and students, and teachers and principals. Um, so how do the races get along, um, like do people socialize together, eat lunch together, you know?
Jerome: Everybody here get along great…nice.
Jesse: We get along, but the--the Hispanics, we are--there are a lot of Hispanics here. I feel like they...you know, congregate a lot. You know, we all congregate when we do, but...I feel like we kind of separate at that point, because, I don't--I don't understand why. Maybe it's because we don't speak Spanish as well as them.
Amber: I think that, um, actually at lunch, every time I see Hispanics or black people, black people sit at a table together, probably because they all talk about the same things. And the Hispanics sit at the same table probably because they all speaking Spanish, or talking about the same thing or talking about what they do at home. Probably because they have a different lifestyle, which comes back to their culture. And I don't think it's like any type racist type thing, but probably just cause...that's them.
Jerome: But sometimes you will see, like a table at lunch time, like a table where it is blacks, Hispanics, and whites, all sitting and talking.
Amber: They do that, too. Like we get along, but sometimes they just do their own thing, too.
I: OK. Are, um, students treated fairly based on their race at this school?
Amber: Yeah.
Jerome: Yes.
Jesse: There's no way not to treat us fairly. [Amber laughs] It's like, it's so much brown going on here, it's crazy. And like, I think the white teachers--I wish we had more black teachers or Hispanic teachers. I wish we had more diversity amongst the teachers. Because when we do talk about race and stuff, I think that they think that they owe us some kind of explanation or something. Or they feel like they should prove to us that they're not racist or something like that. If we have a black teacher, they can just tell us straight up, you know, like this is what our people went through, and this is why it was wrong. This is why these people did it, like…you know, I do appreciate having the white teachers, though, because...they can give us, uh...
Amber: Their side of the story.
Jesse: Yeah, their point of view on the whole thing.
I: So do you all think that the experiences of African American girls are different from African American boys here?
Jesse: Definitely.
[short pause]
I: Can anybody talk more about that?
Jesse: Boys and girls, period. We just have a different experience. I mean girls, oh, it's so dramatic nowadays. I mean, for some girls here, they just...would you like to...?
Amber: Wretched! [both laughing]
Jesse: but yeah, it's uh, it's definitely a different experience. [Amber laughing] For most of the African American girls, they boys expect us...for the most part the boys expect the girls to do a certain thing. They expect us to all look pretty, and...be all bubbly and--
I: Jerome is laughing for the record, so.
Jesse: Yeah, yeah. That's…he--you see it. Yeah, um, and those who aren't are, you know...
I: Those who aren't what? Pretty?
Jesse: No, it's not even about beauty anymore. It's like, they--it's a certain standard that guys hold us to here. You know, they get to laugh and goof around and stuff but…we was just talking about this. Did y'all have that meeting?
Amber: What meeting?
Jesse: Well, the whole 11th grade had a meeting, and they were basically telling us, "boys, don't touch the girls. Girls, be smart about boys, cause boys make babies, and girls bring them home." And stuff like that, you know, that…
I: Oh, who was saying all of this?
Jesse: They just had to talk to us about that because it's some stuff that--
I: Who is they? The teachers or the administrators, or...?
Jesse: The--our administrators. See, that's what I love about the administrative team here. They do--
Amber: They care.
Jesse: Yeah, they care. And it's a certain parent aspect of their job that they really...that they do well.
I: We'll talk later. All right. Um, just to sum up a few things. Well, not necessarily to sum up, but just some last questions. So...now that we've kind of talked about how your school approaches things like race, diversity, and culture. What does your school do well when it comes to race, diversity, and culture?
Amber: Dance.
I: You said what?
Amber: Dance.
I: Oh, dance.
Jerome: Treat everyone--talk about--sometimes they will say treat everybody equally. Yeah.
I: Mmm hmm.
Jesse: Yeah, I feel you  on the dance thing. That's--that's really good. Like she--Mrs. McCallum’s [?-00:09:41] our dance teacher or dance instructor. She, like...she's really cultural. Like she talks--she doesn't just do hip hop, she does African and modern and stuff like that. She's really good at integrating that. And, also, like...you said what do they do well pertaining to race?
I: Mmm hmm. Diversity and culture.
Jesse: They just kind of encourage us to mix. They encourage us to be a school instead of just a group of...
I: So teachers have said that students should mix together? You've experienced that?
Jesse: Yeah. And...what we talked about in Mrs. McCallum’s? The time is [00:10:19]. Well, yeah, she--well really Mrs. McCallum is like the height of culture here. She, you know, she teaches--
I: What's her race or ethnicity?
Jesse: She's--she's a African American woman. And…but she's--she's traveled. She's well-traveled. Most of the teachers are, that's something they do great here. They're all well-traveled and they tell us about their experience in different countries. And, it's just--it's really enriching to know...just it's enriching to know that the people instructing you aren't just like from college, from point A to point B. They've traveled and they've seen... And they don't treat us differently, you know.
Amber: For example, uh, when Mrs. McCallum, the dance teacher--instructor, whatever, tells us about her, um...her travels or whatever. She tells us...how the people there act, or wherever she went and from point A to point B, like she don't miss no details. She tells the whole story and...everything.
I: Ok. Um, what do you think your school could do better in terms of race, diversity, and culture?
Amber: Talk about it more.
Jesse: We hardly even cover it. This is really catching us off guard because we don't really...we don't—we don't discuss it. It's like the elephant in the room.
I: Mmm hmm. So if they talked about it more, what are some of the things you all wish they would say or do?
Jesse: I--I think we are pretty much getting along as a school without it. But...it's just for the enrichment of education, we could elaborate on something other than, you know--sometimes we do talk about slavery and racism and discrimination. I've heard a lot about that, but we don't talk about it…we talk about it on a national scale. Just like how it used to be in America. We don't talk about how it still is...or how if you go to a different country--if I was to go to like...if you go somewhere else--stuff that I have to learn on my own. If I just learned it in school...it would be easier.
I: Ok. What about you, Jerome?
Jerome: Just talk about it more.
I: Mmm hmm. What are some of the things you would be interested in learning or knowing?
Jerome: Uh...uh, like uh, just talk about--like I didn't know about the--it's still slavery going on, so. If we talked about racism more, then we would--then I would have known that. Yeah.
I: Ok. Are there other things that I missed or that things you want to mention about your school or teens and, um, in terms of race, diversity, or culture, that hasn't been mentioned yet?
Amber: I think you kind of touched everything. Or, maybe because we don't talk about it as much in school we don't know what questions to ask right now.
Jesse: I just think that more than just the negative stuff, I think we should be celebrated for--I think we should just celebrate our differences, you know, and…instead of just everybody, you know, we talked a lot about racism and stuff. We should talk about, or we should be thinking about how...how everything is such a good mix right now. Cause like, not just black people listen to hip hop and not just white people listen to alternative and.. I don't know—I don’t know too many other people who listen to stuff that's in Spanish, but...you know, stuff like that.
I: Ok.
Jesse: It's not...don't...yeah.
I: All right. Any other last words before I end the tape? OK.
This is what it feels like to be black in white spaces
Black people experience discrimination every day – it’s knowledge inaccessible to white people and, when confronted with it, most are incredulous
Almost every black person in America has experienced the sting of disrespect on the basis of being black. A large but undetermined number of black people feel acutely disrespected in their everyday lives, discrimination they see as both subtle and explicit. Black folk know everyday racism – that becomes powerfully underscored by highly publicized racial incidents like the incident at Starbucks, the recent spate of police killings of black men, or the calling of police on a black female student while napping in a common area of a Yale dormitory.

In the face of these realities, black people everywhere take note and manage themselves in a largely white-dominated society, learning and sharing the peculiar rules of a white-dominated society in which expressions of white racism are becoming increasingly explicit.

While American society purports to be open and egalitarian, or “equal opportunity”, such everyday outcomes leave black people deeply doubtful. Moreover, black people are generally convinced that they must work twice as hard to get half as far in life.

 Long before the election of Donald Trump, black people believed the average white person was against them and their kind
Among their own, black people affirm and reaffirm these central lessons and, out of a sense of duty, try to pass them along to others they care about, and especially to their children.

For black people, experience holds a dear school, and the knowledge they acquire is based largely on the experience of living while black in a society that is dominated by white people.

Therefore, this cultural knowledge is most often inaccessible to white people, and when confronted with it, most white people are incredulous.

The historical context
When US supreme court chief justice Roger Taney declared in 1857 that black people had no rights that white people were bound to respect, he was observing the social reality of his day. Slavery effectively established black people at the bottom of the American racial order, a position that allowed every white person to feel superior to any black person.

After Emancipation, as black people migrated to cities in the north and south, their stigma both followed and preceded them. When black people settled in their new communities, their reception was decidedly mixed, but as their numbers grew, local white people worked to contain them. Over time, the lowly position of black people became institutionalized, and passed from racist generation to racist generation.

Thus, black people usually were relegated to the least desirable sections of a city, often “across the tracks” from the white communities, or in the “black sections” of town, the precursor to the iconic black ghetto.

As black people operate in these segregated spaces, they can “be themselves”, away from the direct control of white people. Yet, there is still a general sense that white people and their agents ultimately control the ghetto’s racial reality, notably the financial, legal and criminal-justice systems.

While American society is often ideologically characterized as privileging equal opportunity, the everyday reality of the masses of black people is that of being peculiarly subordinate in almost every way, but this is especially true when they venture into essentially white spaces.

Navigating the white space
Following the civil rights movement, a “racial incorporation” process of the 1970s and 1980s was established, and along with “fair housing”, school integration, and “affirmative action, it benefited many black people . Many of these people have joined the larger American middle class, and they and their children have become increasingly assimilated. But this assimilation is essentially into what they know and perceive as white space, which they often navigate haltingly, and essentially alone.

Yet, large numbers of black people continue to reside in segregated neighborhoods, and their children attend largely segregated schools. When venturing outside their local neighborhoods, particularly into spaces that are overwhelmingly white, they are often surveilled, and at times questioned, harassed, or occasionally arrested by the police – all for essentially “living while black”.

 Black voters go to the polls in the 2008 presidential election.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 Black voters go to the polls in the 2008 presidential election. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty Images
In navigating these white spaces, they may feel themselves to be tokens, as symbolic representatives of the urban black ghetto. When encountering a white person in this setting, they tend to assume that person is likely to be racially insensitive, if not openly prejudiced, and before giving the person full trust, they hesitate.

In the thinking of many black people, it is a highly unusual or even rare to encounter white people who do not share a negative opinion of them and their kind. At the same time, they know and believe there are non-racist white people; they know that such white people exist and may refer to them as “decent” or “good” white people. Here, black people at times see a class divide – they tend to be biased in favor of the well-off white people, those they guess are less likely express prejudice toward black people.

When navigating the white space, black people are typically on the hunt for this type of person, thinking that such people might be supportive and friendly or serve them as allies in their struggles, are likely to understand, or at least are not so likely to exhibit the kind of racial animus against them which they strongly associate with most other white people.


'I can feel aggression because of my color': Americans tell of everyday racism
 Read more
For black people navigating white space, such allies are critically important, since black folk know there are in fact white people who absolutely hate them but don’t say so to their faces. In fact, a major problem for black people is to figure out which white persons are decent and trustworthy and which ones are covertly racist; they worry about misplacing their trust, as they commonly experience “let downs” and racial setbacks.

Because of these challenges, many black people are suspicious of white spaces and hesitate to invest in relationships with white people they find there. Finding such relations too problematic, they tend to disengage with white people both in public and in private, keeping such relations somewhat superficial.

Given the rigid distinctions between black and white people, black people know very little about how white people actually live, and vice versa.

In fact, profound borders between ordinary white people and ordinary black people have always existed in this country. Since black and white people have lived apart for centuries, their coming together in a cosmopolitan urban society is often a major challenge, and it presents many issues for black people as they move about. Black people tread lightly and exit from stressful situations as soon as they can.

 For black people navigating white space allies are critically important.
Facebook Twitter Pinterest
 For black people navigating white space allies are critically important. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo
In the white space, white people and others often stigmatize anonymous black persons by associating them with the putative danger, crime and poverty of the iconic ghetto, typically leaving black people with much to prove before being able to establish trusting relations with them. Accordingly, the most easily tolerated black person in the white space is often one who is “in his place”– that is, one who is working as a janitor or a service person or one who has been vouched for by white people in good standing. Such a person may be believed to be less likely to disturb the implicit racial order – white people as dominant and black people as subordinate.

Strikingly, a black person’s deficit of credibility – a function of history of white supremacy, but also their more recent association with the iconic ghetto – may be minimized or tentatively overcome by a performance, a negotiation, or what some black people derisively refer to as a “dance”, through which individual black people may be required to show that the ghetto stereotypes do not apply to them; in effect, they perform to be accepted. This performance can be as deliberate as dressing well and speaking in an educated way or as simple as producing an ID or a driver’s license in situations in which this would never be demanded of white people.

The nod
As black people move about the white space, often the first thing they note is the number of black people present. The presence of familiar faces, or simply other black faces, brings a measure of comfort.

Being generally outnumbered by white people, black people feel a peculiar vulnerability, and they assume that other black people understand the challenges of this space in ways that white people cannot. Since the white space can turn hostile at any moment, the implicit promise of support black people sense from other black people serves as a defense, and it is part of the reason that black people acknowledge one another in this space, with the racial nod – an informal greeting serving as a trigger that activates black solidarity in this space.

 Most white people have little idea, and many are willfully ignorant, of challenges black people face in white spaces
First, the strangers’ eyes meet. If both “pass inspection”, mutual nods likely follow, communicating, “I see you.” Those who project negative images of the iconic ghetto will be ignored. This differentiation reflects how today’s black ghetto differs from the ghetto under the rule of Jim Crow. Then the ghetto included upper-class, middle-class and working-class people, as well as the poor. Excluded from white neighborhoods, all black people lived there, as a caste apart from white society. While desperately poor black people resided in that community, it also included well-educated professional people, supportive social structures, and a strong focus on propriety and decency.

Today, black people inhabit all levels of the American class and occupational structure. They attend the best schools, pursue the professions of their choosing, and occupy various positions of power, privilege and prestige. But for the ascendant black upper middle class, in the shadows lurks the specter of the urban ghetto. The iconic ghetto is always in the background, shaping Americans’ conception of the anonymous black person as well as the circumstances of black people in all walks of life.

Race in America: I won’t apologize for my blackness.

Today, I laughed and cried simultaneously, shouted my frustrations and then became still. At times or most times, I find being black means being forced into a small tight space and being told that I cannot come out until I conform to a way that makes a predominately white society feel comfortable. During these moments, my psyche does not know how to react to such unreasonable confinement. How should a black body respond to being made to ask permission to exist in the same space alongside others without being singled out, chastised and reprimanded?  Not only exist but also to live and act in a manner that should be viewed as normal but instead is considered problematic because it makes others feel threatened. Let me offer some context for those who may be confused by my introduction.

Since I began publicly expressing my views on race in America, more specifically what it feels like to be black in America, I have received some form of pushback. I cannot talk about the injustice of unarmed black men being killed by police, the unfair criticism of Colin Kaepernick, or my personal accounts as a black woman without someone telling me why my feelings are misplaced and to shut up and sit down. 

It does not matter if the request is cloaked in fluffy words or scathing and raging, the message is still a resounding: "Be quiet, we are tired of hearing about your imaginary struggles." Because if you don’t believe that racism is both subtle and blatant and that being black in a majority white society does not come with a caveat, then it must be a figment of your imagination.

We, black people, must all be struck with an "I am a victim" complex and therefore our concerns, our plight, our abuse, and our deaths are some twisted fantasy. So while I am very much a real human being created by the God that this country worships and most swear they love, how do I communicate that America still has a real issue with racism and blackness in a manner that makes you feel comfortable? 

It does not matter how I say that racism and race issues are very much alive and thriving in this world. The very thought makes you squeamish. But you know what? Being the object of said racism and having my skin viewed as an agitation leave me disgusted and jaded with the idea that we should remain silent and just coalesce.

How do we unite as a country when we are so divided on this issue? If standing together means that I have to continuously self-evaluate, question my identity, hide or feel ashamed of my skin and the culture that defines it so you can feel safe then I’ll pass. I won’t feel safe until you look, listen and cut it out. Just because racism is not in the form of white sheets, burning crosses, water hoses and white only signs does not mean it has been obliterated. Decades of racist conditioning, stereotyping and microaggressions cannot be undone with a wave of some wand, singing songs and erecting or removing monuments and symbols. It was a systematic and deliberate process for us to arrive at this point as a people. It will take a systematic and deliberate process to fix it.

Let me direct you to a history of redlining, gerrymandering, poll taxes, the grandfather clause, mass incarceration, drug wars and drug laws, and voter ID laws. Let’s have difficult conversations about the Tulsa Race Massacre, the historic African-American business districts of Hayti Community and Jackson Ward in Richmond, Virginia, and why these places all but disappeared. Let’s talk about white flight and why that occurs. Let’s talk about how the Voting Rights Act of 1965 was implemented 54 years ago. To offer further context, my father is 75 years old. So, in the same manner that people who experienced "real" racism are still alive today, so are the conveyors, constructs and foundations of racism. But we won’t talk about what lies at the heart of this country because it’s too much of an inconvenience for revisionist history.

So I won’t go quietly into the dark night, which is also black. 

I won’t apologize for my blackness and the experiences that cling to it. 

I won’t remain silent at constructive criticisms designed for the comfort of others while our discomfort is a nuisance to be dismissed. 

Black is bold, brash, aggressive, edgy and defiant. It is also demure, soft, soothing and collected. It is ugly and beautiful. It is tired and spirited. 

Blackness cannot be labeled or defined in one word. It cannot be generalized. It will not be banned. 

But if I had to describe it in one sentence, I would say, "Blackness is the same as whiteness only without privilege and true freedom." Now, let me shut up and sit down. 

One morning this past September, Kiarra Boulware boarded the 26 bus to Baltimore’s Bon Secours Hospital, where she would seek help for the most urgent problem in her life: the 200-some excess pounds she carried on her 5-foot-2-inch frame.

To Kiarra, the weight sometimes felt like a great burden, and at other times like just another fact of life. She had survived a childhood marred by death, drugs, and violence. She had recently gained control over her addiction to alcohol, which, last summer, had brought her to a residential recovery center in the city’s Sandtown neighborhood, made famous by the Freddie Gray protests in 2015. But she still struggled with binge eating—so much so that she would eat entire plates of quesadillas or mozzarella sticks in minutes.

To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app.

As the bus rattled past rowhouses and corner stores, Kiarra told me she hadn’t yet received the Cpap breathing machine she needed for her sleep apnea. The extra fat seemed to constrict her airways while she slept, and a sleep study had shown that she stopped breathing 40 times an hour. She remembered one doctor saying, “I’m scared you’re going to die in your sleep.” In the haze of alcoholism, she’d never followed up on the test. Now doctors at Bon Secours were trying to order the machine for her, but insurance hurdles had gotten in the way.

Kiarra’s weight brought an assortment of old-person problems to her 27-year-old life: sleep apnea, diabetes, and menstrual dysregulation, which made her worry she would never have children. For a while, she’d ignored these issues. Day to day, her size mostly made it hard to shop for clothes. But the severity of her situation sank in when a diabetic friend had to have a toe amputated. Kiarra visited the woman in the hospital. She saw her tears and her red, bandaged foot, and resolved not to become an amputee herself.

Kiarra arrived at the hospital early and waited in the cafeteria. Bon Secours is one of several world-class hospitals in Baltimore. Another, Johns Hopkins Hospital, is in some respects the birthplace of modern American medicine, having invented everything from the medical residency to the surgical glove. But of course not even the best hospitals in America can keep you from getting sick in the first place.

It was lunchtime, but Kiarra didn’t have any cash—her job, working the front desk at the recovery center where she lived, paid a stipend of just $150 a week. When she did have money, she often sought comfort in fast food. But when her cash and food stamps ran out, she sometimes had what she called “hungry nights,” when she went to bed without having eaten anything all day.

When I’d first met Kiarra, a few months earlier, I’d been struck by how upbeat she seemed. Her recovery center—called Maryland Community Health Initiatives, but known in the neighborhood as Penn North—sits on a grimy street crowded with men selling drugs. Some of the center’s clients, fresh off their habits, seemed withdrawn, or even morose. Kiarra, though, had the bubbly demeanor of a student-council president.

She described the rough neighborhoods where she’d grown up as fun and “familylike.” She said that although neither of her parents had been very involved when she was a kid, her grandparents had provided a loving home. Regarding her diabetes, she told me she was “grateful that it’s reversible.” After finishing her addiction treatment, she planned to reenroll in college and move into a dorm.

Now, though, a much more anxious Kiarra sat before her doctor, a young white man named Tyler Gray, who began by advising Kiarra to get a Pap smear.

“Do we have to do it today?” she asked.

“Is there something you’re concerned about or nervous about?,” Gray asked.

Kiarra was nervous about a lot of things. She “deals by not dealing,” as she puts it, but lately she’d had to deal with so much. “Ever since the diabetes thing, I hate hearing I have something else,” she said softly, beginning to cry. “I’ve been fat for what seems like so long, and now I get all the fat problems.”

“I don’t want to be fat,” she added, “but I don’t know how to not be fat.”


Kiarra resolved to get healthy after visiting a diabetic friend in the hospital who’d had her toe amputated. Kiarra’s own diabetes is already causing her vision to blur. (Jared Soares)
Kiarra’s struggles with her weight are imbued with this sense, that getting thin is a mystery she might never solve, that diet secrets are literally secret. On a Sunday, she might diligently make a meal plan for the week, only to find herself reaching for Popeyes fried chicken by Wednesday. She blames herself for her poor health—as do many of the people I met in her community, where obesity, diabetes, and heart disease are ubiquitous. They said they’d made bad choices. They used food, and sometimes drugs, to soothe their pain. But these individual failings are only part of the picture.

In Baltimore, a 20-year gap in life expectancy exists between the city’s poor, largely African American neighborhoods and its wealthier, whiter areas. A baby born in Cheswolde, in Baltimore’s far-northwest corner, can expect to live until age 87. Nine miles away in Clifton-Berea, near where The Wire was filmed, the life expectancy is 67, roughly the same as that of Rwanda, and 12 years shorter than the American average. Similar disparities exist in other segregated cities, such as Philadelphia and Chicago.

These cities are among the most extreme examples of a national phenomenon: Across the United States, black people suffer disproportionately from some of the most devastating health problems, from cancer deaths and diabetes to maternal mortality and preterm births. Although the racial disparity in early death has narrowed in recent decades, black people have the life expectancy, nationwide, that white people had in the 1980s—about three years shorter than the current white life expectancy. African Americans face a greater risk of death at practically every stage of life.

Except in the case of a few specific ailments, such as nondiabetic kidney disease, scientists have largely failed to identify genetic differences that might explain racial health disparities. The major underlying causes, many scientists now believe, are social and environmental forces that affect African Americans more than most other groups.

To better understand how these forces work, I spent nearly a year reporting in Sandtown and other parts of Baltimore. What I found in Kiarra’s struggle was the story of how one person’s efforts to get better—imperfect as they may have been—were made vastly more difficult by a daunting series of obstacles. But it is also a bigger story, of how African Americans became stuck in profoundly unhealthy neighborhoods, and of how the legacy of racism can literally take years off their lives. Far from being a relic of the past, America’s racist and segregationist history continues to harm black people in the most intimate of ways—seeping into their lungs, their blood, even their DNA.

When kiarra was a little girl, Baltimore was, as it is today, mired in violence, drugs, and poverty. In 1996, the city had the highest rate of drug-related emergency-room visits in the nation and one of the country’s highest homicide rates.

RELATED EVENT

Watch the author, Olga Khazan, discuss her story and persistent health disparities in Baltimore.

With her father in and out of jail for robbery and drug dealing, Kiarra and her mother, three siblings, and three cousins piled into her grandmother’s home. It was a joyous but chaotic household. Kiarra describes her grandmother as “God’s assistant”—a deeply religious woman who, despite a house bursting with hungry mouths, would still make an extra dinner for the addicts on the block. Kiarra’s mother, meanwhile, was “the hood princess,” a woman who would do her hair just to go to the grocery store. She was a teen mom, like her own mother had been.

Many facets of Kiarra’s youth—the fact that her parents weren’t together, her father’s incarceration, the guns on the corners—are what researchers consider “adverse childhood experiences,” stressful events early in life that can cause health problems in adulthood. An abnormally large proportion of the children in Baltimore—nearly a third—have two or more aces. People with four or more aces are seven times as likely to be alcoholics as people with no aces, and twice as likely to have heart disease. One study found that six or more aces can cut life expectancy by as much as 20 years. Kiarra had at least six.

She and others I interviewed recall the inner-city Baltimore of their youth fondly. Everyone lived crammed together with siblings and cousins, but people looked out for one another; neighbors hosted back-to-school cookouts every year, and people took pride in their homes. Kiarra ran around with the other kids on the block until her grandma called her in each night at 8 o’clock. She made the honor roll in fifth grade and got to speak in front of the whole class. She read novels by Sister Souljah and wrote short stories in longhand.

Yet Kiarra also describes some jarring incidents. When she was 8, she heard a loud bop bop bop outside and ran out to find her stepbrother lying in the street, dead. One friend died of asthma in middle school; another went to jail, then hanged himself. (Other people I spoke with around Penn North and other recovery facilities had similarly traumatic experiences. It seemed like every second person I met told me they had been molested as a child, and even more said their family members had struggled with addiction.)

Kiarra told me she got pregnant by a friend when she was 12, and gave birth to a boy when she was 13. Within a year, the baby died unexpectedly, and Kiarra was so traumatized that she ended up spending more than a month in a psychiatric hospital. When she came home, her boyfriend physically and sexually abused her. He “slapped me so hard, I was seeing stars,” she said.

She took solace in eating, a common refuge for victims of abuse. One 2013 study of thousands of women found that those who had been severely physically or sexually abused as children had nearly double the risk of food addiction. Kiarra ate “everything, anything,” she said, “mostly bad foods, junk food, pizza,” along with chicken boxes—the fried-chicken-and-fries combos slung by Baltimore’s carryout joints.

At first, she thought the extra weight looked good on her. Then she started feeling fat. Eventually, she said, “it was like, Fuck it. I’m fat.” As her high-school graduation approached, she tried on the white gown she’d bought just weeks earlier and realized that it was already too tight.

Kiarra didn’t know many college-educated people, but she wanted to go to Spelman, a historically black college in Georgia, and join a sorority. Her family talked her out of applying, she said. Instead, she enrolled in one local college after another, but she kept dropping out, sometimes to help her siblings with their children and other times because she simply lost interest. After accumulating $30,000 in student loans, she had only a year’s worth of credits.

So Kiarra put college on hold and worked at Kmart and as a home health aide—solid jobs but, as she likes to say, “not my ceiling.” She longed for a purpose. Sometimes, she had an inkling that she was meant to be an important person; she would picture herself giving a speech to an auditorium full of people. But she remained depressed, stuck, and, increasingly, obese.

She began doing ecstasy, and, later, downing a pint of vodka a day. She remembers coming to her home-health-aide job drunk one time and leaving a patient on the toilet. “Did you forget me?” the woman asked, half an hour later. Kiarra broke down crying.

Soon after, she checked into Penn North for her first try at recovery. This past year’s attempt is her third.


Kiarra lives in Sandtown, the Baltimore neighborhood made famous by the Freddie Gray protests, where heart disease and cancer are the leading killers. (Jared Soares)
Sandtown is 97 percent black, and half of its families live in poverty. Its homicide rate is more than double that of the rest of the city, and last year about 8 percent of the deaths there were due to drug and alcohol overdose. Still, its top killers are heart disease and cancer, which African Americans nationwide are more likely to die from than other groups are.

The way African Americans became trapped in Baltimore’s poorest—and least healthy—neighborhoods mirrors their history in the ghettos of other major cities. It began with outright bans on their presence in certain neighborhoods in the early 1900s and continued through the 2000s, when policy makers, lenders, and fellow citizens employed subtler forms of discrimination.

In the early 1900s, blacks in Baltimore disproportionately suffered from tuberculosis, so much so that one area not far from Penn North was known as the “lung block.” In 1907, an investigator hired by local charities described what she saw in Meyer Court, a poor area in Baltimore. The contents of an outdoor toilet “were found streaming down the center of this narrow court to the street beyond,” she wrote. The smell within one house was “ ‘sickening’ … No provision of any kind is made for supplying the occupants of this court with water.” Yet one cause, the housing investigator concluded, was the residents’ “low standards and absence of ideals.”

When blacks tried to flee to better areas, some had their windows smashed and their steps smeared with tar. In 1910, a Yale-educated black lawyer named George McMechen moved into a house in a white neighborhood, and Baltimore reacted by adopting a segregation ordinance that The New York Times called “the most pronounced ‘Jim Crow’ measure on record.” Later, neighborhood associations urged homeowners to sign covenants promising never to sell to African Americans.

Some of Baltimore’s rowhouses are so long-forsaken, they have trees growing through the windows. They are in themselves harmful to people’s health.
For much of the 20th century, the Federal Housing Administration declined to insure mortgages for blacks, who instead had to buy homes by signing contracts with speculators who demanded payments that, in many cases, amounted to most of the buyer’s income. (As a result, many black families never reaped the gains of homeownership—a key source of Americans’ wealth.) Housing discrimination persisted well beyond the Jim Crow years, as neighborhood associations rejected proposals to build low-income housing in affluent suburbs. In the 1990s, house flippers would buy up homes in Baltimore’s predominantly black neighborhoods and resell them to unsuspecting first-time home buyers at inflated prices by using falsified documents. The subsequent foreclosures are a major reason so many properties in the city sit vacant today.

Some of Baltimore’s rowhouses are so long-forsaken, they have trees growing through the windows. These dilapidated homes are in themselves harmful to people’s health. Neighborhoods with poorly maintained houses or a large number of abandoned properties, for instance, face a high risk of mouse infestation. Every year, more than 5,000 Baltimore children go to the emergency room for an asthma attack—and according to research from Johns Hopkins, mouse allergen is the biggest environmental factor in those attacks.

The allergen, found in mouse urine, travels through the air on dust, and Johns Hopkins researchers have found high levels of it on most of the beds of poor Baltimore kids they have tested. When kids inhale the allergen, it can spark inflammation and mucus buildup in their lungs, making them cough and wheeze. These attacks can cause long-term harm: Children with asthma are more likely to be obese and in overall poorer health as adults. Getting rid of the mice requires sealing up cracks and holes in the house—a process that can cost thousands of dollars, given the state of many Baltimore homes.

The mice, of course, are just one symptom of the widespread neglect that can set in once neighborhoods become as segregated as Baltimore’s are. One study estimated that, in the year 2000, racial segregation caused 176,000 deaths—about as many as were caused by strokes.

All summer, Penn North’s aging air conditioners strained against the soupy heat outside. For Kiarra, the first few months at the recovery center felt like boot camp. The staff woke the residents before 7 a.m., even if they didn’t have anywhere in particular to be. Kiarra’s days were packed with therapies: acupuncture in the mornings, meant to help reduce cravings; individual meetings with peer counselors; Narcotics Anonymous sessions, in which dozens of strangers slumped on metal folding chairs and told stories of past drug binges.

Once a week, Kiarra would leave her post at the front desk and walk across an empty playground for an appointment with her psychotherapist, Ms. Bea (who asked that I not use her full name). Kiarra would climb the steep, narrow staircase of Penn North’s clinical building, then stop at the landing to catch her breath.

Healing the Divide: Kiarra’s Story

Olga Khazan, Kiarra Boulware, and Steve Dixon, the director of Penn North Recovery, discuss persistent health disparities in Baltimore
Ms. Bea’s goal was to help Kiarra understand how her substance abuse, her weight, and her difficult childhood were interconnected. Like many young people in Baltimore, Kiarra had spent her life trying to attain ordinary things—love, respect—that seemed always to skid beyond her grasp. She wanted male attention, but then she got pregnant. The baby made her happy, but the baby died. Her siblings started having kids and she loved them, but she was jealous. She fell into a deep-sink depression. She’d eat a second dinner, then get so drunk that she’d scream at her friends. She’d realize that she was going to wake up to a blistering hangover and would keep drinking. It was coming anyway, so why not? “Struggle days,” she called these times.

During one appointment in August, Kiarra told Ms. Bea that she had been attending Overeaters Anonymous meetings by phone. Something another member had shared, about why people are sometimes reluctant to shed weight, had stuck with her. “He was saying when you lose the fat, you lose a part of you,” Kiarra recalled.

A few years earlier, she had founded a club for plus-size women called Beautiful Beyond Weight, with some of her best friends. The goal was to help overweight women feel better about themselves. They put on fashion shows that she described as “Beyoncé big, but on a Christina Aguilera budget.” She worried that if she lost too much weight, the other girls in the club would think she was a hypocrite. She decided she would aim to be “slim-thicc”—not too skinny.

“So imagine if you were a size 14,” Ms. Bea said. “What would be happening here—with you?”

Ms. Bea was trying to help Kiarra see how she sometimes uses her size as a form of protection, a way of making her feel invisible to men, so that she could eventually work through her fear.

In Kiarra’s experience, disappearing could be useful. She told me that once, when she was 17, before she had gotten so big, she met a guy in an online chat room. She went over to his place, where they watched TV and started having sex. But then—the skid—his three friends barged into the room and raped her. She fled, half-dressed, as soon as she could.

“Yeah,” Kiarra said, envisioning herself many sizes smaller. “I wouldn’t be able to take it.”

Kiarra has trouble concentrating sometimes, and she thinks the reason might be that she and her brother were exposed to lead from old paint. When Kiarra was 6, her grandmother heard that a girl living in another property owned by the same landlord had been hospitalized. She took Kiarra to get tested. The results showed that the concentration of lead in her blood was more than six times the level the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention considers elevated—an amount that can irreversibly lower IQ and reduce attention span. Kiarra, too, was hospitalized, for a month.

Scientists and industry experts knew in the 19th century that lead paint was dangerous. “Lead is a merciless poison,” an executive with a Michigan lead-paint company admitted in a book in 1892. It “gradually affects the nerves and organs of circulation to such a degree that it is next to impossible to restore them to their normal condition.” But as late as the 1940s and ’50s, trade groups representing companies that made lead products, including the Lead Industries Association, promoted the use of lead paint in homes and successfully lobbied for the repeal of restrictions on that use. Lead-paint companies published coloring books and advised their salesmen to “not forget the children—some day they may be customers.” According to The Baltimore Sun, a study in 1956 found that lead-poisoned children in the slums of Baltimore had six times as much lead in their systems as severely exposed workers who handled lead for a living.

In speeches and publications, Lead Industries Association officials cast childhood lead poisoning as vanishingly rare. When they did acknowledge the problem, they blamed “slum” children for chewing on wood surfaces—“gnaw-ledge,” as Manfred Bowditch, the group’s health-and-safety director, called it—and their “ignorant parents” for allowing them to do so. In a letter to the Baltimore health department, Bowditch called the lead-poisoned toddlers “little human rodents.”


Even after stricter regulations came along, landlords in segregated neighborhoods—as well as the city’s own public-housing agency—neglected properties, allowing old paint to chip and leaded dust to accumulate. Some landlords, seeking to avoid the expense of renovating homes and the risk of tenant lawsuits, refused to rent to families with children, since they would face the greatest risk from lead exposure. Poor families feared that if they complained about lead, they might be evicted.

Partly because of Maryland’s more rigorous screening, the state’s lead-poisoning rate for children was 15 times the national average in the ’90s; the majority of the poisoned children lived in the poor areas of Baltimore. In some neighborhoods, 70 percent of children had been exposed to lead. The city’s under-resourced agencies failed to address the problem. Clogged by landlords who hid behind shell companies, Baltimore’s lead-paint enforcement system had ground to a halt by the time Kiarra was poisoned. According to Tapping Into The Wire, a book co-authored by Peter L. Beilenson, the city’s former health commissioner, Baltimore didn’t bring a single lead-paint enforcement action against landlords in the ’90s. (A subsequent crackdown on landlords has lowered lead-poisoning rates dramatically.)

When Kiarra was 14, her family sued their landlord for damages, but their lawyer dropped the case because the landlord claimed he had no money and no insurance with which to compensate them. Kiarra remembers her grandmother not wanting to give up, demanding of the lawyer, “What do you mean there’s nothing you can do?”—only to get lost in a tangle of legal rules she didn’t fully understand.

On a hot saturday this past August, Kiarra brought her nieces with her to work and corralled them in the front office. She was babysitting that day, and staffing was short at the center. The girls climbed restlessly on the stained office chairs and under the tables.

Kiarra is close with her family. She spends much of her free time texting her favorite sisters on her cracked cellphone, and she talks to her grandmother every few days. Any familial strife upsets her deeply: She can vividly recount a long list of times her mother disappointed her. Then again, sometimes she feels like she’s the one who has let everyone down, with all her drinking and dropping out.

Near the end of the day, Kiarra’s cellphone rang. It was her father, calling to yell at her because she hadn’t come to see him recently. “I’ve been busy,” Kiarra told him.

When Kiarra was little, and when her father wasn’t incarcerated, he had provided for his children—unlike many dads she knew. She’d sought his approval by researching Islam, his religion, and trying to reconcile it with the strict Christianity of her grandmother’s home. A few years ago, she tried to impress him by joining a tough-seeming social club that turned out to be too much like a gang. (It “wasn’t a good fit,” she told me.)

On some level, she still respected her father. But he had an explosive personality and struggled with depression and addiction. Kiarra told me he taught her what men are supposed to be: fierce protectors who sometimes turn their wrath on the women in their lives.

Kiarra usually tried to see her father’s outbursts as a cry for help. But today, she decided to confront him. Their conversation escalated as they accused each other of failing at fatherhood and daughterhood.

“How many of my plays have you been to?,” Kiarra demanded.

Her father launched into a tirade. “I will come for your fucking dumb ass!,” I overheard him yell at one point. “You going to respect me!”

“Respect works both ways,” Kiarra said. “I’m not that little girl that’s gonna let you slap the shit out of me.”

What bothered Kiarra most was that her father had never hit his other daughter that way, so why her? Why did it feel like he was always rejecting her? (Her father later confirmed that he had hit her as a child, saying, “Discipline is a must, whatever form you choose.”)

As he continued screaming—“I’m gonna put your fuckin’ head in the dirt”—Kiarra’s eyes glazed over. “Death gotta be better than here,” she said.

She hung up, then wiped away tears. Just today, he had called her at 12:30 a.m., 3:48 a.m., 7:47 a.m., 11:24 a.m., 3:33 p.m., and 4:44 p.m. One time when she didn’t answer the phone, Kiarra said, he showed up in person at Penn North.

Her father called back, rambling less coherently than before. “How much of my life did you spend incarcerated?,” Kiarra asked him. When she was little, she would go out hustling with him. “I was 14 fucking years old seeing dead fucking bodies, and you’re talking about where the fuck did this drinking shit come from?”

Kiarra hung up, this time for good. Then she wept. “As long as I’m fucked up, this man is cool, but as soon as I decide I want to get my fucking life together it’s like …” Her voice trailed off. She turned and told me she wanted to go to McDonald’s. “McDonald’s is killing me,” she said, “but it’s a special treat.”

She ordered her usual—a McDouble and a McChicken, along with a sweet tea—and waited silently amid the beeping of the cash registers.

Most of the people I met at Penn North were optimistic and surrounded by fiercely loyal friends. But their lives also seemed, like Kiarra’s, unrelentingly stressful. Between the hugs and handshakes, I heard a lot of trepidation. I have to move again … Where will I go? Will I get this job at Target? Will I ever walk again? Will I get to eat today?

Research shows that this kind of day-in, day-out worry can ravage a person’s health. Certain stressful experiences—such as living in a disordered, impoverished neighborhood—are associated with a shortening of the telomeres, structures that sit on the tips of our chromosomes, which are bundles of DNA inside our cells. Often compared to the plastic caps on the ends of shoelaces, telomeres keep chromosomes from falling apart. They can also be a measure of how much a body has been ground down by life.

Some researchers think stress shrinks telomeres, until they get so short that the cell dies, hastening the onset of disease. Different kinds of prolonged emotional strain can affect telomeres. In one study, mothers who had high stress levels had telomeres that were as short as those of a person about a decade older. Another study found that children who spent part of their childhood in Romanian orphanages had telomeres that shortened rapidly.

Even among people making $175,000 a year or more, blacks are more likely to suffer from certain diseases than whites are.
Arline T. Geronimus, an expert on health disparities at the University of Michigan, has found that African Americans have more stress-related wear and tear in their bodies than white people do, and the difference widens with age. By measuring telomere length in hundreds of women, Geronimus estimated that black women were, biologically, about seven and a half years older than white women of the same age.

Unrelenting stress also affects our daily behaviors: Stress causes some people to eat more, especially calorically dense foods, and to sleep less. On average, African Americans get about 40 minutes less sleep each night than white people do. Among women in one recent study, poor sleep alone explained more than half the racial disparity in cardiovascular-disease risk.

Living in a dangerous neighborhood like Sandtown requires a vigilance that can flood the body with adrenaline and cortisol. These hormones are supposed to kick in only long enough for us to get away from an immediate threat. If they trickle through us constantly, they can raise the risk of heart disease and compromise the body’s immune system.

These kinds of changes in body chemistry aren’t limited to people living in poverty. Even well-off black people face daily racial discrimination, which can have many of the same biological effects as unsafe streets. Thomas LaVeist, the dean of Tulane’s School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, has found, for example, that even among people earning $175,000 a year or more, blacks are more likely to suffer from certain diseases than whites are.

In an emerging field of research, scientists have linked stress, including from prejudice, to compounds called methyl groups attaching to our genes, like snowflakes sticking to a tree branch. These methyl groups can cause genes to turn on or off, setting disease patterns in motion. Recently, a study linked racial discrimination to changes in methylation on genes that affect schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and asthma.

Several studies also show that experiencing racism might be part of the reason black women are about 50 percent more likely than white women to have premature babies and about twice as likely to have low-birth-weight babies. Researchers think the stress they experience might cause the body to go into labor too soon or to mount an immune attack against the fetus. This disparity, too, does not appear to be genetic: Black women from sub-Saharan Africa and the Caribbean are less likely to have preterm births than African American women are, possibly because they’ve spent less time living in America’s racist environment.


Kiarra Boulware (Jared Soares)
Throughout the fall, Kiarra kept her doctor appointments, and she began working out at the small gym at Penn North, placing a picture of Chrissy Lampkin, the curvaceous girlfriend of the rapper Jim Jones, on her treadmill as motivation.

But Kiarra still wasn’t losing much weight. Like most Americans, she got advice from her friends on what to eat—but that advice at times proved confusing and contradictory. She tried a boiled-egg diet, which left her with hunger pangs and a lot of leftover eggs in the fridge. She went seven days without meat but wound up eating more starches, which sent her blood sugar soaring.

One bright day in late September, Kiarra returned to Bon Secours to see Ebony Hicks, a behavioral-health consultant who, like Kiarra’s doctor, works through Health Care for the Homeless, a Baltimore nonprofit that cares for the very poor. Hicks began by asking Kiarra what her goal was. Kiarra said getting down to an even 200 pounds “would be awesome.” Her weight remained, stubbornly, about 150 pounds higher than that. But she stayed optimistic, writing down Hicks’s aphorisms about needing to be patient and not expecting immediate results—“Anything overnight usually lasts about a night!”—in a notebook she’d brought with her.

Gently, Hicks asked Kiarra what she had eaten that day.

“French fries,” Kiarra said.

“All you’ve had is french fries?,” Hicks asked.

“Mm-hmm.”

It was 3:30 in the afternoon.

They walked to a room across the hall, and Kiarra stepped onto a scale.

“I gained two pounds,” she said quickly, “so now I’m depressed. I eat too much.”

“We have to work on getting you more regularly eating throughout the day,” Hicks said.

Kiarra asked whether “detox tea,” something she’d heard about from a friend, was healthy.

“You can detox with lots of fiber-filled vegetables,” Hicks said.

“What’s that?,” Kiarra asked.

Hicks pulled up a web page describing fruits and vegetables that contain fiber. She listed them off one by one.

Would Kiarra eat avocados?

No.

Coconut? Also no.

“I do eat berries,” Kiarra said. “Let’s put that down.”  Kiarra doesn’t know why she dislikes so many fruits and vegetables. Her grandmother cooked healthy meals, putting turkey in big pots of greens for flavor. She had a rule that you could never leave the table without eating your vegetables. Kiarra would fall asleep at the table.

Hicks gamely pressed on. “Peas? You like peas?”

“I think I’m going to throw up,” Kiarra said, grimacing.

“Chickpeas,” Hicks offered. “You ever ate hummus?”

“What is hummus?”

Fried food has long been Kiarra’s legal high—cheap, easily acquired, something to brighten the gloomiest day. It is also one of the few luxuries around.

Predominantly black neighborhoods tend to become what researchers call “food swamps,” or areas where fast-food joints outnumber healthier options. (Food deserts, by contrast, simply lack grocery stores.) One study in New York found that as the number of African Americans who lived in a given area increased, so did the distance to the nearest clothing store, pharmacy, electronics store, office-supply store. Meanwhile, one type of establishment drew nearer: fast-food restaurants.

That’s not a coincidence. After the riots of the 1960s, the federal government began promoting the growth of small businesses in minority neighborhoods as a way to ease racial tensions. “What we need is to get private enterprise into the ghetto, and put the people of the ghetto into private enterprises,” President Richard Nixon said around the time he created the Office of Minority Business Enterprise, in 1969. As Chin Jou, a senior lecturer at the University of Sydney, describes in her book, Supersizing Urban America, fast-food companies were some of the most eager entrants into this “ghetto” market.

Fast-food restaurants spent the next few decades “rushing into urban markets,” as one Detroit News report put it, seeking out these areas’ “untapped labor force” and “concentrated audience.” In the 1990s, the federal government gave fast-food restaurants financial incentives to open locations in inner cities, including in Baltimore. The urban expansion made business sense. “The ethnic population is better for us than the general market,” Sidney Feltenstein, Burger King’s executive vice president of brand strategy, explained to the Miami Herald in 1992. “They tend to have larger families, and that means larger checks.” (Supermarket chains didn’t share this enthusiasm; in part because the widespread use of food stamps causes an uneven flow of customers throughout the month, they have largely avoided expanding in poor areas.)

One reason college graduates live longer, researchers believe, is that education endows people with the sense that they control their own destiny.
Fast-food executives looked for ways to entice black customers. Burger King made ads featuring Shaft. KFC redecorated locations in cities like Baltimore to cater to stereotypically black tastes, and piped “rap, rhythm and blues, and soul music” into the restaurants, Jou writes. “Employees were given new Afrocentric uniforms consisting of kente cloth dashikis.” A study from 2005 found that TV programs aimed at African Americans feature more fast-food advertisements than other shows do, as well as more commercials for soda and candy. Black children today see twice as many soda and candy ads as white children do.

The marketing and franchising onslaught worked, and the diets of low-income people changed dramatically. Before the rise of fast food and processed foods, many low-income black families grew their own food and ate lots of grains and beans. In 1965, one study found, poor and middle-income blacks ate healthier—though often more meager—diets than rich whites did. But over the next few decades, the price of meat, junk food, and simple carbohydrates plummeted, while the price of vegetables rose. By the mid-’90s, 28 percent of African Americans were considered by the U.S. Department of Agriculture to have a “poor” diet, compared with just 16 percent of whites.

At carver Vocational-Technical High School, which Kiarra and Freddie Gray attended at the same time, only about a third of students go on to enroll in college—yet another factor that could be contributing to the area’s low life expectancy, given that college graduates outlive high-school dropouts in every racial category.

One reason college graduates live longer, researchers believe, is that education endows people with the sense that they control their own destiny. Well-educated people seek out more nutritional information because they’ve been told they can achieve anything—why not perfect health, too?

Kiarra, by contrast, wasn’t yet sure what she could accomplish. She wanted to live up to an image in her mind of a “fly, crazy, daring, dream-chasing girl,” but she cycled between getting excited about new possibilities and being flattened by setbacks. Sometimes, she would dream of turning Beautiful Beyond Weight into a business—one that would sell T-shirts and caps with empowering messages for plus-size women. But she wasn’t really sure how to do that.

When Kiarra felt especially adrift, she would visit Steve Dixon, Penn North’s director, in his tiny office at the end of the hall, and ask him for advice on finding her purpose. He would tell her to pray and meditate. “When you pray, it’s like you’re talking to God,” Kiarra told me once. “But when you meditate, it’s God talking to you.”


Kiarra sometimes asks Steve Dixon, the director of Penn North, for advice on how to find her purpose in life. (Jared Soares)
In November, some combination of prayer, meditation, and research led Kiarra to enroll in a medical-assistant training program. The class added another $7,000 to her student-loan debt, but Kiarra seemed to thrive in it, and a few weeks before Christmas, she was excitedly planning her post–Penn North life. Once she had her medical-assistant certificate in hand, she would move to Philadelphia, get a job at Temple University, and take classes to become a registered nurse. Eventually, she hoped to become a nursing professor. That future held everything she wanted: helping people, being a leader, making her own money, having her own place.

Feeling chipper, she decided to browse the wigs at a nearby store, stroking the hairpieces and whispering to the best ones that she would be back for them on payday. She had a new reason to get dolled up: a truck driver, “fine as wine” and with no kids—and, accordingly, no messy entanglement with another woman. She tried to boss him around, but he told her to mind her own business, and she kind of liked that. His birthday was approaching, and she wanted to take him someplace fancy. She would wear a black dress, and he would wear a black suit.

To help pay for everything, Kiarra decided to register as a Lyft driver. All that was required was a $250 deposit; she began calling around to different relatives to raise the money.

Twenty-seventeen, she thought, had been her best year yet.

A few weeks later, a bitter cold settled through the East Coast, and Kiarra’s sunny mood had faded. Things had ended with the truck driver over some mean Facebook posts and the fact that he’d lied to her about not having kids. She was also reconsidering her plans for the future, now thinking that instead of setting her sights on Temple, she should focus on graduating and finding a job—any job—that would pay well enough and provide insurance that would cover her extensive health-care needs. Her grandmother said driving for Lyft in Baltimore was too dangerous. She might not move to Philly after all.

Kiarra figured that if she really wanted to have a successful plus-size clothing brand, she’d at least have to live long enough to see it happen.
But a new opportunity presented itself. Because of a change in her insurance plan, Kiarra had to switch doctors. Right away, her new doctor asked her whether she had considered bariatric surgery. Kiarra said she was scared of the complications, such as digestive problems and infections, but the doctor reassured her that complications are rare. She was interested in the gastric sleeve, a procedure that would dramatically reduce the size of her stomach, causing hormonal changes that would help her lose much of her body fat.

Kiarra still felt conflicted about losing her identity as an overweight woman. She couldn’t relate to the people on the Overeaters Anonymous calls who said they hated their bodies. She liked hers. “People say, ‘Hey, you’re fat,’ ” she said. “And I’m like, ‘That’s obvious.’ ” But she was motivated by her diabetes—which was already causing her vision to blur and her feet to tingle—along with the looming threat of other “fat diseases,” as she called them, frightening ones like heart failure. She figured that if she really wanted to have a successful plus-size clothing brand, she’d at least have to live long enough to see it happen.

She decided on the spot to go forward with the surgery, worried that she might change her mind otherwise. She signed up for the mandatory pre-op classes that prepare participants to eat just half a cup of food for every meal, at least initially, after the surgery. Her mother was nervous, but her sisters were all for it. Her grandmother told her to put it in God’s hands.

Earlier that month, Kiarra had organized a birthday party for her 2-year-old niece, Brooklynn, in Penn North’s community room, decking out the dingy yellow walls with pink balloons and ribbons. Within a few weeks, it was decided that Kiarra would gain custody of Brooklynn for a while so that Kiarra’s sister could go back to get her high-school diploma.

Kiarra was happy with this arrangement—she already sometimes referred to Brooklynn as her “daughter-girl”—and she began to see Brooklynn as a reason to stay on track. Juggling coursework and single parenthood exhausted her at times, but she wanted to be the successful role model for Brooklynn that she never had herself. In the chatty toddler who loved dress-up and Moana, Kiarra had found, if not her purpose, at least a purpose. “It feels like the Earth is full, you know?” she told me one day this spring.

Her new status as the child’s guardian meant that her stay at Penn North could be extended, through some alchemy of program definitions, for nearly another year. Staying on would mean cheap housing for Kiarra and Brooklynn, two people who desperately needed it.

With that settled, Kiarra turned her attention to the six-month process of hoop-jumping that was required to qualify for the gastric-sleeve surgery. The first pre-op class was an hour and a half long and took place at a hospital 30 minutes from Penn North. Kiarra thought the time commitment seemed excessive; with a smirk, she wondered aloud why the doctors couldn’t just tell her and the other patients, “Y’all fat. We gonna cut you up.”

But the doctors needed Kiarra to understand that the surgery was not something to take lightly. To qualify, she would have to get her sleep apnea and diabetes under control. She would have to keep a food journal, submit to behavioral evaluations, write an essay explaining why she no longer wanted to be morbidly obese. For the rest of her life, she’d need to wait 30 minutes between eating a meal and drinking a beverage. When one of Kiarra’s classmates said that after the surgery, eating too much would cause you to get violently sick for an hour, Kiarra recoiled a little.

 
The Black Family in the Age of Mass Incarceration

All of the rules and obligations seemed more intense than Kiarra had expected. “Six months, you’re going on like 16 appointments,” she said. “Whoo, that’s a lot.” Given all she had to contend with, I wondered whether she would end up meeting the requirements—and, given the stakes, what might happen to her if she didn’t.

Tony Conn, a Penn North staffer with whom Kiarra is close, calls her a “wonderful, brilliant person.” Early on in my reporting, he told me her biggest flaw is that she sometimes doesn’t see things through to the end. “As soon as [something] looks like it’s gonna come to light, she’s like, ‘Okay, I did that. So let’s find something else,’ ” he said.

But lately, Kiarra had shown a new sense of calm and dedication. One day while she worked the front desk, an older man flirted with her as he signed the attendance sheet.

“When you look in the mirror,” he said, “and see how beautiful you are, what do you say to yourself?”

“We’ve come a long way,” she said quietly. “Let’s stay there.”

What It’s Like to Be Black on Campus Now
Suddenly our experiences no longer seem isolated—they’re linked in a larger movement against institutional racism. Ten black student journalists tell their stories.

Stay woke is a call to consciousness, awareness, skepticism, and action. Last week, however, it became more than a figurative admonition when Lolade Siyanbola, a black graduate student at Yale University, was reported to campus police by a white female student for the suspicious action of napping in a dormitory common room. Like generations of hard-grinding Ivy League scholars, Siyanbola had succumbed to the exhaustion of finals week. But her inability to stay awake—a literal failure to stay woke—resulted in a 20-minute encounter with police officers who insisted she verify her right to be on campus.

I first learned about the Yale incident when Prof. Sherri Williams of American University shared the news with the Black on Campus GroupMe chat. The GroupMe is one of the key tools that Dr. Williams and I use to communicate with a cohort of 10 student journalists. The Black on Campus fellows attend colleges and graduate schools throughout the country. Since January they have been meeting, studying, traveling, and writing together in a program jointly sponsored by the Anna Julia Cooper Center at Wake Forest University and The Nation as they document the lived experiences of today’s black college students.

This story was produced in partnership with the Anna Julia Cooper Center of Wake Forest University as part of Black on Campus, a series reporting on issues of national consequence to a black college student audience. It is under the umbrella of Student Nation, a section devoted to highlighting campus activism and student movements from students in their own words. For more Student Nation, check out our archive.  The Student Nation program is made possible through generous funding from The Puffin Foundation.
The Black on Campus cohort barely reacted when Dr. Williams shared word of the Yale incident. They may have been outraged, but racial shock is exceedingly rare among these young reporters. After all, their academic year began with white supremacists wielding flaming tiki torches as they marched through the grounds of the University of Virginia chanting “You will not replace us.” On a near weekly basis, we’ve shared stories of campuses inflamed by symbolic racism, discursive violence, or bodily harm against black students in predominantly white spaces. We reeled when Howard University was caught in a funding scandal, suggesting that even the nation’s premier historically black university was a place where students experienced intentional institutional harm. 

ADVERTISING

For Black on Campus fellows, these stories were not distant or disconnected. Fellow Lauren Lumpkin and Dr. Williams study and work at American University, where bananas and nooses were found hanging in trees one year ago. The wounds of white-supremacist violence are still fresh at the University of Virginia, where fellow Alexis Gravely is a junior. Wake Forest fellow Bri Reddick was trying to study for midterms when she found herself at the center of a campus racial controversy making national headlines.

Together we have been a loosely connected but distinct cohort of faculty members and graduate and undergraduate students following multiple interconnected threads of black life on American college campuses, as we seek to understand what it now means to be Black on Campus.

CAMPUS AWAKENING
Today’s black college students have spent their baccalaureate years navigating campus hate speech, dodging constantly changing DACA rulings, and living with the real consequences of repealing affirmative action and Title IX enforcement. The new class of college seniors started school in the fall of 2015. That semester, graduate student Jonathan Butler stopped eating to protest inaction and ineffective administrative responses to racial incidents at the University of Missouri. He refused to resume eating until the system’s president, Tim Wolfe, resigned. Four days into his hunger strike, Butler was joined by 30 Missouri football players who announced they would boycott football activities until Wolfe resigned. Within weeks both the campus chancellor and Wolfe were gone, and the effects of the Mizzou protests were still being felt for years after they began. In 2017, The New York Times reported on plummeting enrollment and a budgetary crisis at the University of Missouri as students remained wary of a campus where racial clashes had reached such a fever pitch. It is impossible to determine the precise nature of the correlation—whether the protests effected these new campus realities—but there is no question that the events at Mizzou continue to resonate across the landscape of American higher education.

Mizzou was a turning point. Within weeks, black students organized massive demonstrations on Ivy League campuses and flagship state universities. Activists decried the racial climate on campuses in the South, Northeast, Midwest, and California. They demanded change at schools small and large, on campuses with conservative or liberal reputations. Echoing tactics employed by student demonstrators in the 1960s and ’70s, they held vigils and rallies and staged takeovers of administrative offices, articulating systemic, symbolic, and structural concerns about their experiences of being black on campus. Yale students resisted faculty who declared racially insensitive Halloween costumes to be protected speech. Princeton students demanded the removal of Woodrow Wilson’s name from campus buildings in light of his troubling racial legacy. Harvard Law students discovered photos of black faculty members that had been defaced in the halls. Suddenly these experiences no longer seemed isolated, but were linked as part of a larger movement against institutional racism in higher education.

CURRENT ISSUE
 
View our current issue
Subscribe today and Save up to $129.

Many stood in solidarity with the student protesters, but others were exasperated by their actions and in some cases implied that personal discomfort, or even interpersonal experiences of racism, were a steep but necessary price to pay for a college education. Even within black communities, there were intergenerational divides born from the painful disappointments of seeing college—long a kind of symbolic promised land—decried as yet another space of racial violence and rejection. It can seem inherently revolutionary to nurture black intellect in a country built on the surplus value extracted from nonconsensual physical and reproductive black labor. Viewing higher education as a pathway to equity, African-American families and communities have made enormous sacrifices to send black kids to college. It was painful to see that golden ring turn to brass.

SUBSTANCE OF THINGS HOPED FOR
In March 1960, Ebony magazine profiled “Richmond’s Genius Twins” in a multipage spread about William and Wesley Harris, who were poised to graduate from segregated Armstrong High School and become the first in their family to attend college. Ebony described Wes and William as “sons of a restaurant owner who died in 1955 and a Richmond seamstress who is a chronic arthritic and earns $35 a week doing home sewing and making slipcovers.” Knowing her sons’ departure for college would significantly reduce her household’s already meager income, Rosa Harris told Ebony she was nonetheless determined that “the boys will go to college!” in spite of the difficult sacrifices it required. Black parents, grandmas, papas, aunties, congregations, Masonic lodges, sorority chapters, and fraternal orders have echoed the determination to ensure that the children in their communities make it to college to earn a coveted degree.

A college education has always been a rare commodity. Prior to World War II, only a small fraction of white people attended college. It was not until the second half of the 20th century that the GI Bill and a changing domestic labor market made college a more common experience for white Americans. In 1960, only 10 percent of white men older than 25 had completed four years of college; by 1990, that share had grown to nearly one in four white men. Today, more than a third of white Americans over 25 have college degrees.  

For black folks, the barriers to college have been far higher and more aggressively guarded. In 1960, 2.8 percent of black men and 3.3 percent of black women over 25 had completed four-year college degrees. Today, one in five black Americans is a college graduate. For much of the 20th century, the vast majority of black students obtained degrees at Historically Black Colleges and Universities. HBCUs have proud legacies but have never boasted the robust resources of their predominantly white peers.

It is worth remembering that George Wallace did not stand in the doorway of a primary school or high school. Rather, in 1963, he blocked the entrance to a state land-grant university as he sought to keep Vivian Malone and James Hood from entering the University of Alabama—thus ensuring, Wallace hoped, “segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever.”

Is it any wonder, then, that black folk have developed a tradition of boisterous, thunderous, celebratory enthusiasm during college graduations? Each and every graduate marching, striding, shouting, and hopping across the stage as they accept the parchment so rarely passed into black hands is a repudiation of Governor Wallace. And is it any wonder why black people were appalled to witness the white graduation marshals at the University of Florida aggressively push, pull, and nearly tackle black graduates as they attempted to dance their way across the commencement stage this month? In a way, those marshals were reimposing the segregationist barrier; they saw neither the depth of the sacrifices that made these graduations possible nor the historical context in which they were achieved.


NO EVIDENCE FOR THE THINGS WE HOPED TO SEE
The racial inequities in American higher-education outcomes are shocking. During the past 50 years, the gap between black and white high-school graduation rates has narrowed, but the racial gulf for attaining a bachelor’s degree has widened—doubling from 6 to 13 percent since 1964.

Higher education is not a great equalizer. The struggle, sacrifice, and effort it takes for black students to earn a degree often pays meager long-term economic dividends, while extracting enormous emotional costs. The median wealth return for college graduation for white families is $55,869, while black families enjoy a median return on college graduation of only $4,846. This results from the crushing debt carried by black graduates. Compared to their white peers, black students are more likely to borrow to pay for college, less likely make repayment progress within 12 years, and much more likely to default.

Employment prospects improve for African Americans when they graduate from college, but a degree does not eliminate the racial inequities of the labor market. Compared to their white counterparts, black college graduates in their late 20s are nearly twice as likely to be unemployed. Even amid the economic recovery of 2016, black college graduates aged 24–29 experienced an unemployment rate of 9.4 percent—a rate higher than the 9 percent unemployment rate that young white college grads suffered at the peak of the recession.

Colleges and universities are not ivory towers tucked away from the real world or able to avoid controversy at will. These institutions are embedded in our communities and in our consciousness. To be black on campus is to be black in America.

But despite these depressing statistics, there is still something powerfully compelling about being black on campus. When global superstar Beyoncé chose to frame her earth-shattering 2018 Coachella performance with one aspect of black cultural life, she chose black college life. Though she did not attend college, Beyoncé offered up a citational riff on collegiate blackness, from HBCU drum majors and drum lines to black sororities and pledge lines. Despite its all too frequently amounting to four painful years, Beyoncé celebrated the experience of being black on campus.

THE LEGACY
William and Wes Harris, Ebony’s “genius twins,” both became college graduates. In fact, both became college professors. William finished at Howard University, earned a PhD at the University of Washington, then returned to the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, where he taught for more than 20 years and served as the first dean of African-American affairs. Wes made history as the first black man to earn an engineering PhD from Princeton and later chaired the Department of Aeronautical Engineering at MIT. His historic accomplishments began at UVA, where he was the first African-American student to live on the Lawn.

Sending the twins to college required their mother to make enduring sacrifices, but Prof. Wes Harris remembers his experiences at UVA in the early 1960s being marked by racial exclusion, threats, and violence.

SUBSCRIBE TO THE NATION  FOR $2 A MONTH.
Get unlimited digital access to the best independent news and analysis.

 
Dr. Harris’s story is not entirely dissimilar from the one recounted by Lauren Lumpkin, the Black on Campus fellow, last week when she served as the American University School of Communication undergraduate student speaker. Lauren’s brief but affecting address began by acknowledging the parents and teachers whose efforts made her own success possible. She spoke of her teenage longing to attend American University and then of her broken heart when the campus was marred by ugly racial incidents. Lauren explained it was her awakening to the need for diverse voices telling diverse stories in the wake of these experiences that led her to the School of Communication and to her chosen career as a journalist.

More than five decades separate the college careers of Wesley Harris and Lauren Lumpkin. Still, they are intertwined. Wes and William Harris are my uncle and father. Lauren is one of my students. Their stories matter. We must understand what it has meant, historically, and assess what it means now, to be black on campus.

For the next several months The Nation will bring you reporting from the talented young writers of the Black on Campus cohort as they follow in the example of Ida B. Wells—righting wrongs by shining the light of truth upon them.

In this edition of The Interview, Fair Observer talks to Akil Houston, an associate professor of African-American studies at Ohio University.

Anti-black racism in the United States continues to be a problem over half a century since the abolition of Jim Crow laws. These laws enforced segregation between black and white Americans in public places.

Although the Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawed discrimination in employment and banned race-based segregation, as well as sporadic efforts by successive US governments to tackle racial inequalities, racism still looms large in 21st-century America.

Even if it is not a national trend, minorities in the US continue to receive discriminatory treatment from law enforcement officials and face major obstacles in securing housing, health care and quality education, as well as experiencing irregularities in the justice system. To make matters worse, things have escalated under President Donald Trump.

Some scholars talk about the existence of structural racism in the US, and there are statistics that corroborate this. In 2018, a poll by NBC News/SurveyMonkey found that a majority of Americans believe racism is a major issue in the United States. According to the poll, 64% said “racism remains a major problem” in society. This is while 45% of Americans believe race relations are getting worse.

In 2017, a poll by Quinnipiac University scholars found that more than six in 10 Americans say the “level of hatred and prejudice in the United States has increased since Trump was elected president.”

In this edition of The Interview, Fair Observer talks to Akil Houston, a filmmaker, social critic and an associate professor of cultural and media studies at Ohio University, about racial inequality, the politics of race and the portrayal of African-Americans in the media.

The transcript has been edited for clarity.

Kourosh Ziabari: The election of Barack Obama as the president of the United States in November 2008 was a turning point for the nation and for African-Americans. How do you evaluate his performance in terms of challenging and bridging the divide between black Americans and the rest of society?

Akil Houston: I don’t wholeheartedly agree with the premise of this question. Symbolically, sure. The election of Barack Obama did not change the material conditions for black America. Yes, his election was inspirational, for US citizens who longed for evidence to support their belief in meritocracy or for those who misguidedly felt his win signaled the dawning of a post-racial country.

The Obama presidency was not remarkably different than any other concerning key issues impacting African Americans. I would argue — as others have — it would be, and was in some instances, more damaging to have a black man speaking from the platform of the presidency reinforcing the myth that racial inequality in the United States is the burden of black America — the question also gestures toward this.

In a 2016 interview with The Atlantic, Barack Obama highlighted what would be a common theme in his approach to race when he said:

“[A]s a general matter, my view would be that if you want to get at African American poverty, the income gap, wealth gap, achievement gap, that the most important thing is to make sure that the society as a whole does right by people who are poor, are working class, are aspiring to a better life for their kids. Higher minimum wages, full-employment programs, early-childhood education: Those kinds of programs are, by design, universal, but by definition, because they are helping folks who are in the worst economic situations, are most likely to disproportionately impact and benefit African Americans.”

This perspective does not focus on racism as the key factor in the divide, nor does it offer any specific remedies for black America. In fact, as many historians, journalists and those from the “alternative” or “radical left” and progressive camps argued, conditions worsened during his presidency. While the obstructionist role Republicans took during his tenure cannot be undervalued, the administration took a position of non-position on racial matters. 

President Donald Trump is openly called a racist by many of his detractors, including journalists and academics. His views on minorities and immigrants are well known to those who follow US politics. Has life become particularly difficult for African-Americans under President Trump in terms of opportunities and civil liberties?

While the current administration’s use of dog-whistle tactics may create the impression that these are recent trends, anti-black resentment has been rising since the Obama White House years. Acts of terror, from church shootings, instances of police brutality and the deaths of people like Tamir Rice, Tanisha Anderson, Sandra Bland and far too many more, demonstrate that living while black continues to be challenging regardless of who sits in the White House.


Long before this administration, there has been a historical pattern of intense resistance to African-American enfranchisement. This racial resentment typically peaks after periods of significant inclusion efforts, for instance, in response to reconstruction in the 1860s, the human rights movements of the 1950s and 1960s and most recently as a response to the presidency of Barack Obama in 2009. This political moment is consistent with this historical pattern.

One of the major grievances of black Americans about how they are treated pertains to the law enforcement and the justice system in the United States. It’s said that African-American wrongdoers and felons receive harsher sentences than white Americans when they commit the same crimes. Is this assertion demonstrable by facts and figures?

Yes. The book Slavery By Another Name by Douglas A. Blackmon, The New Jim Crow by Michelle Alexander and perhaps more reader friendly for a lay audience is the book Just Mercy by Bryan Stevenson. These books are a small sampling of the many books, peer-review scholarship that provides history, context and empirical data regarding incarceration, sentencing and the historic disparity within the US justice system.

How are black Americans depicted in mainstream media in the United States? Is the portrayal realistic, fair and objective?

This is a broad question and there are a number of variables to consider. For instance, things like overall representation, context of representation and in what forms, must be taken into account. While there are more images of African-Americans than in previous eras, African-Americans continue to be underrepresented as subject area experts — outside of sports and race — in broadcast news content and overrepresented in comedies, sports and reality-TV programming.

Some scholars argue that the decline in incomes and socioeconomic inequality that black and brown Americans experience today mean nothing has changed and improved significantly for African-Americans five decades after the abolition of Jim Crow laws. Do you agree?

Empirical data supports this statement. While I wouldn’t paint the African-American experience with a broad generalized brush, or state nothing has changed at all, there are still significant gaps between various groups based on race and gender. The National Urban League’s State of Black America annual report noted in 2017 that fewer black Americans are dropping out of high school and more are earning associate’s degrees. However, racial disparities still plague other areas of life.

An article in the American Journal of Public Health in 2004 noted that over 886,000 lives could have been saved if black Americans received the same care as whites. This is in reference to the number of African-Americans who died between 1991 to 2000 due to the lack of medical insurance, inadequate insurance, poor service and other factors. Is discrimination against African-Americans in the health sector so serious today?

I would preface my response by first saying: It is essential to be mindful that anti-discrimination laws do not operate exclusively on behalf of black people. While the adage that if white America has a cough, black America has the flu rings true, these disparities in health care impact the entire nation. Health care is as much a class issue as it is a race issue. The continuing debate on affordable health care and how the government will address treatment for pre-existing conditions and infant mortality rates in the African-American and Latino communities, coupled with the fact that people of color often complain that their physicians do not listen or misdiagnose them, provide ample evidence that these factors are present today.

How are African-American artists using arts and culture to reflect on the discrimination and inequalities they face today?

When I see this question, I wonder why it is posed as if it is the sole province of marginalized groups like African-Americans. Most often these same questions are not raised with white artists and their work and how it reflects on the discrimination and inequalities of society.

As the scholar bell hooks once pointed out, ironically, more than any other group, white artists are able to produce cultural products like film and music without being subjected to a constant demand that their work engage or challenge systems of domination based on race, class and gender. As a result, it is often these works that are the most problematic. Yes, there are some artists who engage these issues as there have always been. Artists continue to engage the complexities of life. Regardless if it is the work of playwright Suzan Lori Parks, conceptual artist Hank Willis Thomas, or singer and actress Janelle Monae, artists continue to push the boundaries of creativity by exploring these issues of the day.

How do you think African-Americans can debunk the myths about their community and enjoy greater social, economic and educational opportunities? Is it through political activism that they should overcome discrimination and difficulties?

This question assumes that some act or role by African-Americans is the salve to the nation’s centuries-old racial quagmire and doesn’t address the centrality of American racism in explaining sustained black-white disparity. Throughout US history, African-Americans have attempted all matters of redress, from enlisting in the armed services, the ballot, respectability politics, civil disobedience and other forms of dissent. From the nadir of the Civil War to the present, this has been consistent for African-American activists and their allies.

In 1968, the late writer James Baldwin was asked a similar question by Esquire magazine. His response was that, if “the American black man [and women too] is going to become a free person in this country, the people of this country have to give up something. If they don’t give it up, it will be taken from them.” I would argue that the “give up” portion has to do with the assumption that the promise of a just and truly democratic society is the responsibility of the marginalized. As Baldwin cautioned then, and I would echo now the responsibility is in large measure on white citizens who can influence the national conversation and the behavior of their families and friends in ways that marginalized groups cannot.

As a university professor, do you think black students feel unrestricted and also enthusiastic about engaging and interacting with students of other races, especially white students, or do racial gaps keep them apart and make their collaboration challenging?

Given the racial climate in the United States, one would be hard-pressed to find black students who didn’t feel some level of anxiety about interacting with other student populations. However, black students like other student populations are generally open to collaboration if the university is sincere in its commitment to foster an inclusive, welcoming learning environment.

Also, it is important, again, to note that black students are a diverse group. 

If there is a real interest in solutions, the first step is to stop thinking of black students as a monolith. These students have different worldviews, politics, goals and various identities that distinguish them from other generations of black students and each other. I would argue some faculty have these challenges around collaboration. The university campus is in many ways a microcosm of the larger US. Rather than expecting marginalized students to be the ones to shift, more progressive schools have found ways to institutionalize diversity efforts and change the way they engage these student populations.

Are Social Media Normalizing Campus Racism?
University officials must do more—their priority should be the well-being of students of color, not the institution’s reputation.

When Noah Huerta, a freshman at Arizona State University, logged on to his Twitter account in November 2017, instead of his typical feed of celebrity news, memes, or music, he was surprised to see one of his classmates tweeting the “N word” and stating she had “jungle fever.” Huerta was angry. He considered the classmate a friend, and the incident caused him to distance himself from her. This kind of digital offense is not rare; in fact, it’s quickly becoming commonplace on college and university campuses across the country.

The digital age has introduced a new venue for racial harassment among college students through social-media platforms. This generation is immersed in social networks. More than 80 percent of 18-to-29-year-olds use some form of social media, according to the Pew Research Center. Many social-media platforms offer users the possibility of uploading racially charged photos, videos, and statements with few restrictions. In this new environment, hateful messages spread rapidly. Twenty years ago, university officials would likely have managed these matters with relative privacy, involving few beyond the immediate campus community; now an act of campus racial bias can make national headlines within hours.

This story was produced in partnership with the Anna Julia Cooper Center of Wake Forest University as part of Black on Campus, a series reporting on issues of national consequence to a black college student audience. It is under the umbrella of Student Nation, a section devoted to highlighting campus activism and student movements from students in their own words. For more Student Nation, check out our archive. The Student Nation program is made possible through generous funding from The Puffin Foundation.

This new digital environment presents college administrators with competing incentives. They understand that their university may lose applicants, esteem, and revenue if it is publicly identified as unresponsive to racism. Still, administrators might be wary of potential backlash if they dole out punishment to those who seem to behave badly on social media, only to find out the story is more complicated than the post initially reveals. It has been more than a decade since officials at Duke University punished the lacrosse team after what appeared to be a “smoking gun” e-mail seemed to confirm a young black woman’s allegations of having been raped by several white members of the team. When charges were dropped, Duke officials were excoriated. The Duke Lacrosse backlash launched the career of Richard Spencer, who led the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, in August. 

ADVERTISING

The question is whether university officials can do more than balance the concerns of institutional reputation. It is far more important to the black students on campus to know their well-being, and not the institution’s reputation, is motivating the official response.

Assistant Professor Meredith Clark at the University of Virginia, who researches the intersections of race, media, and power, struggled to name a university that she thinks addresses social-media incidents adequately.

“To date, I have yet to see a university handle essentially a social-media crisis well, particularly one that their students are involved in.” Clark said. “I really have not seen a university do that well. If there were one that had done it well…we might not know about it. The problem would’ve been handled in a way that really didn’t draw a lot of attention.”

When universities are addressing these incidents, openness plays a huge role, Clark said.

CURRENT ISSUE
 
View our current issue
Subscribe today and Save up to $129.

“There’s some very basic things that universities can do.… Those are primarily to be transparent and honest about the problem.… That transparency can be as simple as, ‘We are listening.’” Clark said. “Another thing that I think universities should probably do is try to use social media to essentially build relationships with students.… Social media can be used as a means to opening up a channel of communication that you might not otherwise have with them. So, meet them where they are.”

SWIFT AND SURE
Arizona State University seems to have followed many of Professor Clark’s recommendations in 2014 when a fraternity, Tau Kappa Epsilon, hosted a “MLK Black Party,” where students wore sports jerseys, flashed gang signs, and even drank from watermelon cups. The party was widely documented across social media, specifically Instagram. The party took place on a Sunday, and by Monday the university severed ties with the fraternity and launched an investigation to deal with the students responsible. This kind of swift response is not always seen, especially at predominantly white institutions, although Arizona State does receive above-average ratings for its student and staff diversity.

“If you don’t act quickly, then it can leave the impression that you either don’t care, or you’re not sure what to do,” said Nicole Taylor, the deputy vice president and dean of students for Arizona State University–Tempe. “We act quickly because we want to ensure all confirmed parties that we do care and we want to figure out what the heck happened.”

The presence of campus-related racism on social media does not mean that students are no longer accountable, Taylor said.

“Our code of conduct applies to students no matter where they are. Whether they’re overseas studying, whether they live on campus, whether they live off campus, they do something or they do something online,” she said. “Our code of conduct covers all behavior in all of those places and spaces.… It actually makes it easier when it is online because we get it in writing.”

However, the wheels of justice don’t always turn so easily.


SEEKING TRANSPARENCY
In January 2018 a student at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, posted a video of herself referring to her residential adviser as an “f__ng n___.”

The university newspaper, the Old Gold & Black, reported that the student was a freshman and had posted the video using the slur to a “finsta” account, a secondary Instagram account that is typically used to post things a user doesn’t want on their public Instagram account.

Wake Forest President Nathan Hatch sent a letter to staff, faculty, and students, calling it a “deeply troubling video.”

The university did not identify the student in the video, citing “federal privacy laws.” The student is no longer enrolled at Wake Forest University, but the university did not confirm whether she voluntarily withdrew or was expelled.

The student body’s reaction to the racist video was mixed because the university was discreet about details, said Chizoba Ukairo, program coordinator at the Pro Humanitate Institute at WFU and a 2017 graduate. There were rumors that the student was not expelled but instead left voluntarily, Ukairo said.

“There was certainly anger, frustration.… People wanted [the student who posted the video] to be expelled, which did not appear to happen. She was given an opportunity to leave the university before essentially being forced out,” Ukairo said. “[Wake Forest University administration] were purposefully vague.”

In her role at the Pro Humanitate Institute, Ukairo works on social-justice education and community-service programming for students. When she was a student at Wake, Ukairo was very involved in social issues on campus. Now she works closely with students and helps to orchestrate the Social Justice Incubator at WFU, a student-oriented initiative that discusses incidents such as the video. She acknowledges that WFU handled the incident expeditiously.

SUBSCRIBE TO THE NATION  FOR $2 A MONTH.
Get unlimited digital access to the best independent news and analysis.

 
“Universities drag their heels, institutions are so slow, by nature and by choice. So, to see that she was not just gone in two days but over the weekend, I was shocked.… I think there was a desire for more clarity on how she left, but I think people were happy with her leaving.,” Ukairo said.

The lack of clarity about administrative response came at a time when black students at Wake Forest University were still waiting for justice in the shooting death of 21-year-old Najee Ali Baker, a student at nearby Winston-Salem State University who had been shot and killed at a party hosted by a historically black sorority at Wake Forest University just one day before the racist video post.

SOCIAL MEDIA AS A TOOL AND WEAPON
Other universities have come under fire for not responding promptly to racial incidents, either on campus or online. Recently at the University of Hartford in Connecticut, a former student who is white avoided hate-crime charges for allegedly harassing her black roommate in the fall of 2017. This harassment allegedly included spitting and smearing bodily fluids on the roommate’s belongings. The white student, Briana Brochu, allegedly bragged about the harassment in Instagram posts.

Jazzy Rowe, the black student, requested to switch rooms prior to finding out what Brochu did, according to an arrest warrant from the West Hartford Police Department. In a Facebook video Rowe addressed the harassment, saying that university officials warned her against speaking publicly about the incident and threatened to remove her from campus. Hartford University Public Safety learned about the incidents on October 17, when the victim found out, according to University of Hartford President Greg Woodward.

In this case, when the institution was slow to respond, it was social media that held Brochu responsible for her actions.

Assistant Professor Meredith Clark of the University of Virginia warns against assuming that social media will always help solve problems, though. In fact, racist social media tend to generate a copycat effect, Clark said.

“What I think is particularly dangerous about the replications of those sorts of acts on social media is that they create a model for others to copy,” she said. “There are ways for people to find out about when things are being done to disrupt other campuses, and they can repeat those same behaviors, and that can cause some problems.”

For some students, the solution to balancing racism they see online may lie in decreased social-media use. Navona Carter is a junior at Arizona State University studying history and African American studies. Carter was the president of the Black and African Coalition at ASU during the 2017–18 school year. Carter said that people have to “learn to protect themselves by restricting how much time they spend on social media.”

“It’s so easy to get online and to see things that offend you or things that just aren’t good for your mental health all the time.” Carter said. “I think that if people are constantly seeing things on social media that are upsetting them, maybe they should just monitor how much time they spend on social media, or maybe unfollow or block accounts that make them feel uncomfortable…. There’s no way that we can completely censor our lives where we’ll never be offended by anything we see online.”

Carter also believes that racist incidents online make students of color feel isolated.

“I think it can make students feel as if they don’t belong in the university setting, especially if the incident that they see is at their own university.… African Americans, in Arizona, we’re only 4 percent of the population, and at ASU, we’re only 4 percent of the population. It’s kind of a universal trend across the nation.… It can make you feel like an outsider,” said Carter.

Sometimes those who post racist things online are just uneducated, Carter said. “The main thing I usually see [are] culturally insensitive posts where people who are not black or not specifically people of color will have posts that, if they had a historical understanding, would be very culturally insensitive or inappropriate,” she said.

Social media aren’t going anywhere. In fact, their usage is only increasing. In 2011, the Pew Research Center found that half of all Americans use at least one social-media platform, while only 5 percent of American adults did so in 2005. Today 69 percent of the public uses some type of social media.

As students continue to take to Twitter or Snapchat to share their lives, voice their concerns, or post their racially charged beliefs, college campuses will be left to find ways to best address and combat these old tensions in the new digital age.

Why Are There So Few Black Women Leaders on College Campuses?
Forced to face the twin hurdles of racism and sexism, black women leaders are underrepresented on college campuses. 

She was elected to serve as the first president of the Multicultural Student Government. The University of Kansas MSG was born in the in fall, 2015 following the student protests and hunger strike by black students and boycott by football players at the University of Missouri. In 2015, the student government at the University of Kansas became a contested site of race and representation; in response, students of color created a separate governing body, the Multicultural Student Government, in 2016. Jackson was elected the organization’s president in 2017, making her both the first to lead the organization and one of the few black women leaders on campus.

But by February, the story turned bleak and messy. Jackson, a 23-year-old senior majoring in political science, was removed from office after only one semester. Two black men led the effort to remove Jackson from office. Anthonio Humphrey, former vice president of MSG, said that she mishandled funds, behaved disrespectfully toward members and was unfair to other racial minorities. This ultimately led to the organization’s call for her resignation.

This story was produced in partnership with the Anna Julia Cooper Center of Wake Forest University as part of Black on Campus, a series reporting on issues of national consequence to a black college student audience. It is under the umbrella of Student Nation, a section devoted to highlighting campus activism and student movements from students in their own words. For more Student Nation, check out our archive.  The Student Nation program is made possible through generous funding from The Puffin Foundation.

Ariana Jenkins, a recent graduate of the University of Kansas, said misogyny played a role in ousting Jackson. Jenkins pointed out that a former chief of staff for the organization had been accused of mishandling funds but was given an opportunity to make repayment. Unlike Jackson, that student is a man. “He was given the chance to reimburse MSG, but Jackson was not given that same chance,” Jenkins said. “The protocol in the entire removal process was very messy. There was not enough time for them to highlight the points in which they were trying to dismiss her from the presidency.” 

ADVERTISING

The challenges to Jackson’s leadership exhibit the obstacles that black women face on college campuses when they find themselves in positions of power. Regardless of whether they are students or administrators, when black women are leaders in academia, they are forced to face the twin hurdles of racism and sexism. This kind of resistance to their leadership, along with institutional barriers, may contribute to the dearth of black women leaders on college campuses: Only 7 percent of student body presidents in the 2017–18 school year were black women, according to an American Student Government Association database. In 2016 only 5 percent of college presidents were women of color, while 25 percent were white women, according to the American Council of Education.

WHERE ARE THE BLACK WOMEN LEADERS?
Despite being underrepresented in campus leadership, black women receive a majority of higher-education degrees earned by all black students, earning 68 percent of associate’s degrees, 66 percent of bachelor’s degrees, 71 percent of master’s degrees and, 65 percent of doctoral degrees, according to the National Center for Education Statistics.

Despite having an edge in the classroom, black women are not commonly found among the top leadership of colleges and universities. A Campaign for College Opportunity March 2018 report found that among the diverse populations of California colleges, there are gaps for students of color in leadership positions, including black women. For example, at the University of California-Los Angeles black women make up only 3 percent of academic senate membership and aren’t represented at all in senior leadership positions.

THE FIRST AND ONLY
When black women step into leadership positions, they are often “the first,” a designation that carries significant challenges. In May 2018, Lily McNair, PhD, was selected as Tuskegee University’s eighth president, making her the first woman president in the school’s 136-year history. Current and former college administrators say that they are stuck in the middle of a dichotomy of success for black women leaders on college campuses—the excitement of being the first and not being satisfied with being the only one in their position. Among African-American college presidents (8 percent of the total US college presidents), black women make up 34 percent, according to data from the American Council of Education.

CURRENT ISSUE
 
View our current issue
Subscribe today and Save up to $129.

Yolanda Pierce, PhD, who was recently named the first black woman dean of Howard’s Divinity School in the school’s 150-year history, said the obstacles of black women leaders stem from those in control of hiring. “I knew I was becoming the first woman dean in the school’s history, and so I think it just really begs the question that in 150 years, where have the other women been?” Pierce said. “It wasn’t that I had some sense that I was more qualified than some women 30 years ago or 50 years ago, but it was that some shifts have occurred in terms of higher education and black female leadership. So it was a bittersweet moment. I’m glad to serve as the first [black female] dean, but I don’t want to be the last one.”

Mentorship is the key for sustaining black women leaders especially those in high levels because there are few black women there, Pierce said.

“I think having a mentor is a really valuable and important thing. I also think that questions of racism and sexism always come into play,” she said. “I think it’s very true that black women have to be two and three and four times better than their other counterparts in order to be taken seriously, in terms of their leadership.”

Bernadette Gray-Little, who became the first woman and first black chancellor at the University of Kansas in 2009, echoed that sentiment, saying it is key for more black women to succeed in senior leadership positions, despite the difficulty of those positions. Gray-Little retired in 2017.

“I think the main thing is being ready and being in the right place,” Gray-Little said. “My experience in becoming a chancellor was probably the most typical kind of experience you would have—you had been a faculty member, then a role in university leadership, then you become visible and someone asks you to apply for a chancellor job. More people [in this case, black women] need to get in that place where they’re doing those things, leading up to that path.”

MISSING BLACK GIRLS
The dearth of black women administrators in academia is mirrored in the students on college campuses. Margo McClinton Stoglin, the Texas director for Ignite, a nonprofit that seeks to train the next generation of women political leaders, said while working with Latinx and black college women in Texas, she hasn’t known any black woman to be a student-body president at a predominately white institution, despite seeking office.


“We are seeing that our young women are running for student-government leadership,” McClinton Stoglin said. “They talk about the fact that they have other hurdles to jump over in terms of managing their finances, managing their work and managing academics. Ignite has helped them navigate those constraints and helped them think more strategically on how they can still run for those positions.”

Black women sometimes face resistance when they do hold top student-government positions. When Taylor Dumpson became the first black woman student-government president at American University last year, on her first day in office bananas were hung from campus buildings on string tied like nooses. The bananas had the words “Harambe” and “AKA” written on them. Dumpson belongs to the historically black sorority Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Incorporated. She didn’t finish her term and resigned in January 2018 to “focus on my health and education,” she told the American University student newspaper The Eagle.

Some black women student leaders have to play catch-up and are at a disadvantage in attaining leadership positions, especially those who are first-generation college students, said Kimbrely Dandridge. She became the first black woman student body president at the University of Mississippi in her junior year in 2012.

“When I was growing up, I didn’t have a lot of exposure to how things were on a college campus. Neither of my parents went to college,” said Dandridge, who is now a lawyer at the Butler Snow Law Firm in Tennessee. “I didn’t really know the dynamics of how college was set up and how I was supposed to go on campus and make a space for myself. I feel like a lot of times for [black people] it’s a lot harder because we’re on campus trying to figure things out, and it’s our first introduction, unlike our white counterparts.”

Jackson believes there is also a lack of support of black women leaders even within the black community.

“We don’t get the same respect; we don’t get the same support in return,” Jackson said. “They would rather have a black male, a black non-radical male, who will just go with the flow instead of accepting black women leaders who really want to make a change on campus.”

Humphrey felt differently. Although he said he believes that Jackson worked hard for MSG, he said that she wasn’t always a good leader in her role as president.

SUBSCRIBE TO THE NATION  FOR $2 A MONTH.
Get unlimited digital access to the best independent news and analysis.

 
“This wasn’t about gender. This wasn’t about color. This is about mismanagement of funds and professional leadership,” Humphrey said.

Jasmyne Neely, an African-American Studies major at the University of Kansas, said that she remained neutral about the incident because she wasn’t involved with MSG. Although she said that Jackson’s removal was unfortunate, Neely didn’t think it would prevent more black women from taking leadership positions. However, she did mention that misogyny does play into these types of situations, although it might not have played a role in Jackson’s situation.

“Black men are quicker to clapback and persecute black women than they are to clapback and persecute another black man,” Neely said.

While the obstacles facing black women’s leadership on college campuses are clear, there’s hope for the future. Amber Dodd, a senior at Mississippi State University, is the secretary of her school’s NAACP branch and is excited to become the chapter’s president next year. Though she’s aware of the challenges that she might face, it hasn’t dampened her enthusiasm for leadership.

“A lot of people don’t see me as a leader at all, actually,” Dodd said. “But I’m just committed to making sure that my community stands strong at Mississippi State University, so if I have to be a secretary of the NAACP or a member of the Black Student Association to do that, then I will.”

We Need to Include Black Women’s Experience in the Movement Against Campus Sexual Assault
The national movement to address the college rape crisis seldom reflects the complexities of gender, race, and class black women face at both predominantly white institutions and historically black colleges.

Campus-safety officials gave Venkayla Haynes a rape whistle during her freshman orientation at Spelman College in August 2013. These safety personnel at the historically black women’s college assured the entering students that the sound of one blow of the whistle could be heard from anywhere on campus, fending off potential assailants and prompting a swift response from police. Haynes was not convinced.

“All I could think is if a woman tried to reach for that whistle, the perpetrator will just take it,” said Haynes. “But still, in the moment when we all got the whistle I never thought I would be in any situation to use it.”

This story was produced in partnership with the Anna Julia Cooper Center of Wake Forest University as part of Black on Campus, a series reporting on issues of national consequence to a black college student audience. It is under the umbrella of Student Nation, a section devoted to highlighting campus activism and student movements from students in their own words. For more Student Nation, check out our archive. The Student Nation program is made possible through generous funding from The Puffin Foundation.

It was just a few weeks later when Haynes says she was raped by a football player at nearby Morehouse College after both she and the player attended an off-campus party. Haynes was devastated by this traumatic sexual encounter. “I just felt like a lot of me was taken away,” she said. 

ADVERTISING

Her personal agony was complicated by institutional realities. Both Haynes and her assailant are black. Their colleges—Spelman and Morehouse—are affiliated, historically black, women’s and men’s colleges boasting storied legacies and occupying a rarefied space within African-American education.

When she reported the assault to then–Dean of Students Kimberly Ferguson the following week, Haynes encountered these institutional traditions in ways that felt further traumatizing to her. Haynes says the dean questioned her about her wardrobe and her decision-making that night. Though Haynes insists that her alleged attacker was not a stranger, but a friend in whom she regularly confided, she says she was blamed for agreeing to go out with him alone. Haynes says there was no institutional punishment for the Morehouse student.

Haynes believes the way college administrators responded to her assault reflects longstanding tendencies in the black community to shield black men from interactions with authorities.

“We always come to these situations where we can’t come forward because we want to protect black men or protect our black brothers because they’re already fighting against a system that further criminalizes them,” Haynes said.

CURRENT ISSUE
 
View our current issue
Subscribe today and Save up to $129.

Spelman College refused repeated requests for an interview. However, Joyce Davis, director of Marketing and Communications at the college, did issue a statement by e-mail, which read in part: “Incidents of hate and violence, whether they be verbal, written or physical, have no place at Spelman College. We have zero tolerance for any type of sexual or discriminatory misconduct and are committed to educating our students to be leaders in building healthy relationships that foster healthy communities.”

Morehouse College did not respond to repeated requests for an interview or statement.

US TOO
One in five women are sexually assaulted while in college, according to the National Sexual Violence Resource Center. Black women at historically black colleges and universities experience sexual assault at the same rate as women at predominantly white institutions, according to data from End Rape on Campus.

Efforts to address campus sexual assault have been inadequate on the whole. This is especially true for black undergraduate women, who often face unique pressures to remain silent in the aftermath of sexual assault when their attackers are African-American men. The national movement to address the college rape crisis also seldom reflects black women’s cases and the complexities of gender, race, and class they face at both predominantly white institutions and historically black colleges. Stories of black women who are enrolled in HBCUs or who accuse black men of assaulting them are even more obscured.

Clarissa Brooks is a senior at Spelman College and student organizer with Atlanta University Center’s organizations Shut It Down, It’s On Us, and Know Your IX, all efforts addressing sexual assault. Brooks believes that college administrators tend to prioritize the voices of certain survivors over others.

“If you’re a straight-A student, if you’re the president of a club, then I can take your story more seriously than I would somebody who isn’t doing as well in school, isn’t part of clubs, has a reputation for being more sexually active than another student,” Brooks said. “So if you can be as close to the Ivy League Harvard student, as close to whiteness as possible, then we can believe you, but if you’re not, then it’s just not gonna cut it.”


For black women, not even Harvard pedigree may be enough to make you a believable witness to your own assault. Kamilah Willingham said she was months away from graduating from Harvard Law School when a former friend and classmate at Harvard sexually assaulted her. A few days later, Willingham reported the assault to the Cambridge police and the university.

“I especially felt they looked at me and questioned me in a way that showed they were stereotyping me,” Willingham said. “When people see me, they’ve already got a template for trying to understand me. It’s usually going to be 90 percent stereotypes and misconceptions. They are trying to reconcile me with what they think a black woman should be. I already knew that. It’s not that I forgot that I was black, I forgot that it mattered.”

SILENCE ABOUT VIOLENCE
Not only are the voices of black rape survivors sometimes ignored by authorities, these women can also feel enormous pressure to adhere to a code of silence imposed by racial-community norms as well. There is a strict code of silence that black women are sometimes compelled to adhere to when they experience sexual assault from black men, said NiCole Buchanan, associate professor of psychology at Michigan State University. She was inspired to study intraracial sexual harassment after she saw Clarence Thomas’s Supreme Court confirmation hearing in 1991 and Anita Hill’s congressional testimony about sexual harassment she experienced while working with him.

“Black men have been stereotyped as the super-predator—always down for sex, but willing to be sexually violent,” Buchanan said. “It becomes not only the community saying he’s violent, but a victim potentially saying, ‘Well, this is going to reinforce these stereotypes about my brother, my dad, my lover and I don’t want to do that so maybe I should just stay silent.’”

Three years after Haynes said she was sexually assaulted, a survivor anonymously detailed her own experience of sexual assault in a series of tweets from the Twitter account, @RapedAtSpelman. Echoing similar sentiments that mirrored Haynes’s experience she wrote, “Spelman has taught me to be a free thinking woman and also to be a woman who has to keep her mouths closed to protect her ‘brothers.’”

WHO STANDS FOR THE BLACK WOMEN SILENCE BREAKERS?
Despite all the barriers, there are black women who have nonetheless found ways to tell their stories of assault and survival. “We have the historic whiteness of history, and maleness of history, and combined, they completely eliminated black women’s voices,” said historian Danielle McGuire, an associate professor of history at Wayne State University and the author of At the Dark End of the Street: Black Women, Rape, and Resistance—A New History of the Civil Rights Movement from Rosa Parks to the Rise of black Power. “But black women have been telling their stories for forever, and it’s not like they have been doing it in private or in secret, but often in the public and in the public sphere. The problem is that people weren’t looking. People weren’t listening.”

Consider The Hunting Ground, the 2015 award-winning documentary detailing campus sexual assault in the United States. The film depicted very few black women survivors of sexual assault. Kamilah Willingham, who went public with her story about being sexually assaulted at Harvard, was the only black woman survivor featured prominently. In the context of the film, she did not name her attacker. By June 2015, he was publicly identified as Brandon Winston. Also African-American, Winston was tried on charges of indecent assault and unwanted sexual touching. He was not convicted on criminal charges associated with Willingham’s case—although he was convicted of another charge in a related case for which Willingham testified. Winston was subsequently allowed to reenroll and complete law school at Harvard.

SUBSCRIBE TO THE NATION  FOR $2 A MONTH.
Get unlimited digital access to the best independent news and analysis.

 
The outcome of Winston’s criminal case and his reinstatement as a student was reported at length in a blistering critique of the film by Slate columnist Emily Yoffe, titled “How The Hunting Ground Blurs the Truth.” A group of 19 Harvard Law professors followed suit, publishing a statement that read, in part, “This purported documentary provides a seriously false picture both of the general sexual assault phenomenon at universities and of our student Brandon Winston. For an investigative journalist’s in-depth story demonstrating the biased, one-sided nature of the film and its unfair portrayal of Mr. Winston.” These published pieces raised important critiques of the film and opened necessary conversations about how media discuss race and rape. At the same time they opened wounds for Willingham.

When black women go public with their claims of sexual assault by black men, is there a place where they will be sheltered? Are there institutions and entities committed to their survival?

Professor Janet Halley is one of the Harvard professors who signed the statement. She told Black on Campus that she was dissatisfied with the film’s depiction of the sexual-assault case, and that she decided to be public about this dissatisfaction when she saw Brandon Winston’s name mentioned in a press kit for the film—even though he was not named directly in the documentary itself. Halley said her goal was not to attack Willingham. Rather, she wanted to address the filmmakers, including Amy Ziering, CNN, and Kirby Dick, and to safeguard Winston’s reputation. Halley said there needs to be a fair process for all sides involved in cases involving sexual assault.

“We know that many times the person who gets the false or the inaccurate accusation of sexual wrongdoing will be a person of color, a man of color,” said Halley, who is white. “This is also a social problem that we have. If too many people get accused who didn’t do anything wrong and that becomes the public attitude, then we can’t meaningfully sanction any wrongdoing. We’ve squandered the precious resource of our process. I’ve been excited about #MeToo because it has completely transformed the public attitudes in a way that’s very productive, but there’s definitely been some roadkill in the form of unfair process.”

But it was Willingham who felt like roadkill in this process. In March 2016, she responded to the letter by Harvard Law faculty in an editorial clearly articulating the implications of their treatment of her case to a larger environment facing black women on campuses.

“Even while claiming without evidence that Black men are disproportionately and wrongly implicated in on-campus sexual assault proceedings, you — charged with shaping some of the brightest legal minds in the country — ignore well-established research on the disproportionate rate at which women of color are sexually assaulted. It is for these women that I write.”

SURVIVING AND SPEAKING
Willingham, who continues to advocate for campus-sexual-assault awareness, has a strained relationship with Harvard. Haynes also has a rocky relationship with her college. She gained notoriety for her advocacy work to end sexual assault and had the opportunity to work with former vice president Joe Biden during the It’s On Us campaign tour in 2015. Haynes maintains it was then Spelman began taking more interest in her story.

“For me, that seemed a little bit fake, because that’s not what I exactly wanted,” Haynes said. “What I wanted was for when I reported my freshman year was for me to be relieved, for me to be taken care of, and for my Title IX rights not to be violated.”

For Brooks, Spelman has a long road ahead to improving the climate for black women in the Atlanta University Center. “Spelman would have to acknowledge this history they have, accept it and then actually make the sacrifices to make sure that black women are really free,” she said. “But they’re not going to do that any time soon.”

Editor’s note: The description of Brandon Winston’s trial has been edited after publication to more thoroughly reflect its outcome. Also, an additional quote from Kamilah Willingham was added to the piece after publication, but due to an editor’s error, that addition was not noted at the time. We do so now.

At the University of Virginia, Black Students Are Still Recovering From August 11
As the academic year draws to a close, black students at the University of Virginia still experience trauma from the white-supremacist Unite the Right rally.

evin Willis stood at the base of the Thomas Jefferson statue on the north side of the Rotunda. His arms were locked with the activists next to him as an angry mob carrying flaming tiki torches poured over the Rotunda steps last August at the University of Virginia. He covered his face to avoid being doxxed. They were surrounded. Trapped.
“At the end of the day, nothing could have prepared me for the real fear of dying. We were the first people to have an altercation with this group,” said Willis, a 19-year-old black student majoring in political and social thought at UVA. “No one really knew how violent they intended to be.”

This story was produced in partnership with the Anna Julia Cooper Center of Wake Forest University as part of Black on Campus, a series reporting on issues of national consequence to a black college student audience. It is under the umbrella of Student Nation, a section devoted to highlighting campus activism and student movements from students in their own words. For more Student Nation, check out our archive.

Despite the trauma of that Friday night, Willis still participated in the counterdemonstrations in downtown Charlottesville on Saturday, where a white supremacist drove his car through a crowd, injuring dozens and killing Heather Heyer. 

ADVERTISING

For much of the nation, the “Unite the Right” demonstrations that gripped Charlottesville in August were examples of racial extremism. They were ugly but distant. A hashtag. For black students at the University of Virginia, these events were personal—an explosion of racism on their campus—just weeks before they returned for fall classes.

For Devin Willis, it began the deterioration of his mental health. “I just went through August 12 as if nothing had happened the night before,” Willis said.

Even as the academic year draws to a close, black students at UVA are still grappling with the trauma of witnessing a massive demonstration of racism so close to home, and many question if the university is doing enough to help them cope.

All UVA students have access to the Department of Student Health Counseling and Psychological Services, known as CAPS. Nicole Ruzek, the director of CAPS, said it held a number of outreach efforts to support the UVA community after the white-supremacist rally on campus. Eight support groups were offered to students, including one specifically created as a response to August 11 and 12. Students who were present at the Rotunda on the night of August 11 were also given the opportunity to participate in a group crisis intervention—a discussion between a group of people affected by similar traumas with the goal of providing resources for the future—facilitated by a crisis-response team trained by the National Organization for Victim Assistance.
CURRENT ISSUE

Some students feel these efforts are inadequate.

“I look back at my fall semester and the…tunnel vision I developed,” Willis recalled. “I didn’t want to take care of personal relationships, I didn’t want to sit in stupid classes that don’t mean anything. Then one day, I stopped trying to say I should not be upset. I allowed myself to suffer. That was the big watershed. All the emotions came.”

Willis said that was the first moment he cried about everything he had experienced. He described his emotions since the deadly protest as a mix of empowerment, stress, pride in those who did great things in the midst of controversy, and frustration and disappointment in the stakeholders responsible for what happened.

Willis’s experience of emotional breakthrough came months after the initial trauma. This is not uncommon. A 2012 study that examined racial discrimination and mental health across blacks, Asians, and Hispanics found that blacks reported a “significantly higher degree” of perceived racism. Nine percent of the black respondents said they have experienced symptoms of post-traumatic-stress disorder, while only 6 percent of Hispanics and 1 percent of Asians said the same.

This left Willis feeling that although CAPS offered immediate crisis support, that support was not appropriate for the long-term challenge of addressing racial trauma. Willis indicated he only heard about one support group. It was offered in September, long before he was ready to talk about what happened.

Yuma Tomes, a psychology professor at Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine and eastern regional representative on the Association of Black Psychologists’ National Board, said access to mental-health care is imperative for black people to deal with race-related trauma in a healthy way.


“We may have been taught particular strategies that were unhealthy, and then, as a result, that was then construed by others as being aggressive or as being not productive,” Tomes said. “But we didn’t have access or we chose not to get access.”

Not only is access to mental-health care important, but Tomes noted that who is providing that care can be significant as well. When black students are receiving mental-health care from black counselors, the two parties can connect based on similar and shared experiences.

“Especially when they enter into a primarily white institution, for other individuals that are psychologists that have attended a primarily white institution, that provides another voice or another outlet for them to connect or resonate with on that level,” Tomes said.

Willis did see a counselor at CAPS, but reports, “I didn’t have the fortune of getting a black professional, and I didn’t realize it bothered me until the guy brought it up,” Willis said. “A lot of the psychological factors that can weigh on a person of color’s mental health have to do with racialized realities. I know that I kind of feel uncomfortable being vulnerable with a white person sometimes.”

There are three black clinicians at CAPS, out of a staff of 17. Prior to 2004, CAPS had only one black clinician. There are currently 1,395 black undergraduate and graduate students enrolled at UVA—and only three counselors to serve them.

BLACK ON CAMPUS
WHAT IT’S LIKE TO BE BLACK ON CAMPUS NOW

Tomes suggested a few healthy ways to cope with racial trauma—seek assistance once it is beyond the individual’s control, find outlets for expression, and form strong bonds and relationships with others, especially those who may have similar experiences. Colleges can help, too, by providing more support groups and better training in student-counseling centers to adequately address these types of issues. However, Tomes believes a curriculum that positively portrays people of color can be just as effective.

“Where do we see African Americans or people of color reflected in positive ways in the curriculum?” Tomes questioned. “We need to work with the faculty on making sure we provides the necessary pedagogy to be supportive to individuals of color in the classroom and infuse that into the curriculum.”

Everyday racism in America: Being black means constantly rendering yourself unthreatening to white people
To be white in America is to assume ownership of public spaces. To be black is to live under constant threat of removal.

When I was 15 years old, my sister and I went on a trip to Europe. We went on scholarship because my mother didn’t have the money to pay the full fare for the two of us, which ran into the thousands of dollars. (My kids have since done similar teen academic programs, and they’re amazing.) On that trip were about a half-dozen of us from various public schools in Denver — two guys that I can remember (it was a long time ago) and three or four girls including my sister and me — plus around 15 girls from an exclusive private girls’ school.

While I can no longer remember most of the kids’ names and only vaguely recall their faces, I do remember one of the boys, Moises. He stood out in the group for some of the reasons my sister, June, and I did; we were the only African-Americans on the trip and Moises was the only Latino. He was tall for his age and big, a bear of a boy with deep brown skin and close cropped, jet-black hair.

Though brief, the moment was indicative of exactly the kind of everyday racism that remains a reality for minorities across America.

Moises fit into our little public school group just fine. He was funny, and he laughed easily at our dumb jokes (OK, mostly mine). But what stood out most to me was the first interaction between Moises and one of our trip advisers, an older woman with the approximate personality of Mrs. Lovey Howell from “Gilligan’s Island.” Though brief, the moment was nonetheless indicative of exactly the kind of everyday racism that remains a reality for minorities across America.

During orientation, “Mrs. Howell” was talking to a group of us with Moises standing nearby. Beaming, she remarked on how glad she was that the traveling group was so “diverse,” and that Moises was able to come along on scholarship — as if those of us on scholarship wanted it announced and pointed out. And she said of Moises: “He’s so grateful.”

My sister and I shot each other a look. “So grateful?” We couldn’t believe someone would make such a remark, or think it was a compliment. In order to get the scholarship, Moises had had to do what we’d done: write an essay explaining why the trip would be important to him. He’d earned that trip. We all had. And so even though the comment wasn’t about us, it burned. In part this was because we were embarrassed for Moises, and in part because we knew that it could have been about us.


If you’re black or brown in America and you’re lucky, it’s these small acts that stay with you, like a residual cough after a cold. It’s the clerk who persistently follows you through the store, as if you couldn’t possibly be simply browsing (even as your sister’s kleptomaniac, albeit white, former friend walked among store shelves unmolested.) It’s the college recruiter who sits just across from you for a half hour at the Village Inn, lifting her eyes at every young white girl who walks in the door, while you set a mental timer to see how long it will take her to ask if you are the student she’s looking for.

It’s the waiter with the sour expression who takes so long to come to your table it would appear he doesn’t see you and your party at all, only to snap to it when a white friend arrives and joins the table. It’s the cab drivers, often brown themselves, who switch off their ready light, click their door locks and speed past you to pick up the white person on a nearby corner. It’s the job that was available until you showed up, or the apartment, or the loan. Or the “compliment” on your natural hair that’s doubles as a gentle reminder that straightening it might look more presentable.

It’s the job that was available until you showed up, or the apartment, or the loan. Or the “compliment” on your natural hair that’s doubles as a gentle reminder that straightening it might look more presentable.

If you’re unlucky, though, that residual racial cough becomes a full-body fever that won’t go away. In this case it’s the cop who pulls you over for a minor traffic violation and then stands warily outside the driver’s side door with his hand hovering over his gun. And it’s the deep ache in the pit of your stomach that starts every time you see red and blue flashing lights closing in behind you thereafter, even when you’ve done nothing wrong. It’s the time you called 911 because you heard a noise in your house but were more afraid after the police arrived — and seemed to be searching your home for weed or guns instead of for a burglar.

And if you’re really unlucky, you’ve had the cops called on you for just being in a public space where a white person thought you didn’t belong. And in the worst-case scenario, you or someone you love doesn’t walk away from that interaction alive, whether because of the police or just some random civilian armed with a gun. Just ask the parents of Trayvon Martin.

Image: BBQ-ing while BlackThe "BBQ-ing while Black" event at Lake Merritt in Oakland, California on May 20, 2018 was a response to a confrontation there a few weeks ago when someone complained to police about a group of black people barbecuing.Laura A. Oda / East Bay Times via AP
To be white in America is to assume, with total self-confidence and little afterthought, the personal ownership of public spaces. To be white in America is to have the confidence to say, without a second thought: this space, this neighborhood, this city, this county, this country is mine. Myself and those who look like me have the right to decide who can be here, and even what language can be spoken here. It doesn’t even have to be intentionally malicious. These assumptions just are. They exist inside the American body.

From the moment black and brown people were imported into this country, not as citizens but as worker bodies, transgressing these “white-owned spaces” — from rail cars to restaurants to whole parts of town — could mean humiliation or persecution or even death. It still can today. What has changed is the scale.

We don’t see death for the transgression of white spaces on the level we did in decades past. But it still happens — ask Sterling Brown or the families of Philando Castille, Rekia Boyd, Michael Brown, Freddie Gray, Eric Garner, Sandra Bland, Alton Sterling or Stephon Clark. Meanwhile, the definition of white-owned spaces keeps expanding: from the Starbucks seating area to the Yale common room to the barbecue area of a public park.

Video of Bucks player Sterling Brown being tased released by Milwaukee Police
MAY 23, 201801:07
The current American president luxuriates in promoting white resentment and panic against his brown and black and Muslim citizens, while arguing that some white nationalists can still be “fine people.”

But what has also changed is that people of color and their allies no longer have to be silent. The ease of documenting the routine of white discomfort and black removal has brought our racial cough to the attention of the entire American body.

U.S. NEWS
Alabama mayor apologizes for Facebook post about killing LGBTQ community
Whiteness carries with it the luxury of invisibility. The white presence is deemed benign and eternally welcome. It’s why a white man can walk into a hotel with multiple valises full of guns and attract no notice whatsoever, until he turns his hotel room into a lethal sniper's nest. In contrast, a black man carrying a cellphone in his grandmother’s backyard is deemed so threatening he is gunned down by panicked police.

In contrast, the black presence (the brown presence, too, but particularly the black presence) is rarely viewed as benign. It is by default deemed suspect. Why are you in this store? Why are you in this Starbucks? Why are you in this nice car, or this nice neighborhood? What is your criminal history, or your criminal intent? Why are you running down the street? Why are you wearing that hoodie?

Related
The Starbucks racism video is remarkable for just how unremarkable it is to black Americans
In his book “A Colony in a Nation,” Chris Hayes describes a “nation” of white Americans who see in themselves complete individuality except in one way: They are an organic part of the national body. The “colony” is the imported other, the virus that exists inside the American body but is not of it, and it is viewed solely as a collective. The colony’s members have no individual traits. They are an amorphous menace, and the nation acts constantly to police the colony and to contain it. By depicting the colony as collectively violent, criminal and scary, it can be removed at any time — with those learned stereotypes as justification, and with the police as allies in keeping the colony under control.

Thus, being black or brown in America means living under that constant threat of removal. And yet there is really no way to render yourself unthreatening enough to prevent that 911 call. At the same time, you are expected to act grateful for being “allowed” to be here at all (see: Trump suggesting NFL players who kneel during the national anthem should "maybe" be deported). As if we had a choice.

Being black or brown in America means living under that constant threat of removal. And yet there is really no way to render yourself unthreatening enough to prevent that 911 call.

Reversing everyday racism means somehow getting white Americans to recognize and cede this presumption of sole ownership of public spaces, and to see in each person of color an individual humanity. Thankfully, many of our fellow Americans have already embraced this ecumenical idea, as we can see from individual acts of ally-ship. Inside that now infamous Philadelphia Starbucks, for example, white patrons formed a chorus of outrage as police dragged two black men out in handcuffs for doing nothing more than sitting in a shared space.

Importantly, black and brown Americans cannot do this work for their white peers. The work of anti-racism can only take place inside each individual soul, where we all try to grow into better people. There is no national tonic or instant cure.

I knew what it was like being black and British – but when I moved to the US, I was called the N-word for the first time

I don’t know when I started feeling so much terror when I saw a US police officer. My heart races and my hands get clammy whenever I walk past them. Whenever they greet me, I make sure to respond quickly, with an additional “sir” or “ma’am” at the end to signify respect.

This is not to say that police officers didn’t sometimes make me uneasy in my hometown of London. Earlier this year, data showed that police are four times more likely to use force against black people than white people in London, despite black people accounting for only 13 percent of London’s population.

But here, it’s slightly different. This is the American South, after all. I sometimes wonder: what would happen if I was rude to an officer, or if I didn’t return their greeting? Would the officer shoot me for being aggressive? Or would that be the excuse that he would use?

This scenario plays over and over in my head as I struggle to come to terms with what it means to be black in America, scared that one wrong move could lead to me being dead in seconds.

Last August, I moved to Durham, North Carolina to attend Duke University. I came knowing that even though I’d experienced racism in the UK – being asked, “Where are you really from?” at school; being told to “go back to where you really come from” after Brexit; and being followed around by staff at my local Marks & Spencer – that it would be difficult to adjust to America’s racism.

It was here that two students called me a “n*****r” at 2am; here where a friend taught me to make sure the police knew where my hands were; here that a black cashier at the supermarket shared with me her fears that one day her son will not return home.


Black dad harassed by 'Golfcart Gail' at son's soccer game says 'it's too much'
I don’t tell these stories to dismiss the racism that black people and minority ethnic individuals face in the UK. But rather, I am meditating on how I adjust to the way race and racism functions in the US, and how it is built into the fabric of our society in the UK.

When I contemplate what it means to be a queer black woman in the American South, it feels heavy. It’s not dissimilar – just somewhat familiar. Just like in the UK, I am aware that white people’s racism can determine the outcome of my future. But I still don’t know how to understand that a police officer, or a white supremacist, could see me and shoot, and that would be the end.

I’m dealing with the immediate legacy of slavery, which I see every day in deeply segregated cities and schools, and how that racial schema produced a hierarchical arrangement that we don’t discuss enough. As I walk around my campus, I wonder: what does it mean for me, as a black woman, to be standing on ground built by slaves? What does it mean to be celebrating 50 years of black students studying at an institution that has existed for centuries?

How should I process the fact that my university only just recognised that an African American designed the school’s main campus?
 
Ryanair racism row: Man who abused black woman is named
 
After Dr Who’s Rosa Parks episode, racism on Ryanair is bleak viewing
 
Sainsbury's shopper tells black security guard 'you don’t belong here'
 
Netflix angers black subscribers with targeted posters
 
The Ohio policeman didn't shoot the two black boys. They were lucky
Yes, the racism here is everywhere and violent, but the longer I stay here, the more I realise that it is the same.

In the UK, we’re really good at erasing the legacies of slavery and colonialism, and how so many of us are still carrying that trauma. But being in the American South has forced me to contend with what was sometimes easier to ignore about race and racism in the UK.

Black people dying in police custody. Black boys being stopped and searched. Black women being killed by the police. Black children being failed by their schools. In short, the racism in the UK is just as insidious and violent as the racism I’m learning to live with in the US. The problem is that it’s so easy to point to America’s killings of black people, to say “that’s not happening here” and to ignore everything else. There are many ways in which the state is slowly killing black people, and just because it doesn’t come in the form of a gunshot doesn’t mean it doesn’t matter.

I don’t think I’ll ever forget being called a “n****r.” I don’t think I’ll ever stop feeling terrified around the police. But being in the American South for the last 12 months has forced me to realise just how global anti-blackness is, and just how far we have to go.

As director of research at the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding, Dalia Mogahed keeps her finger on the pulse of the Muslim world. She served on Obama’s Advisory Council on Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships in 2009, advising the president on how faith-based organizations can help government solve persistent social problems.

Mogahed is a former director of the Gallup Center for Muslim Studies, where her surveys of Muslim opinion skewered myths and stereotypes while illuminating the varied attitudes of Muslims toward politics, religion, and gender issues. Her 2008 book with John Esposito, Who Speaks for Islam? What a Billion Muslims Really Think, outlines these surprising findings.

On Monday night, the Muslim Studies Program held a 'Muslims and U.S. Politics' event at the MSU International Center, where Dalia Mogahed, director of research at the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding in Washington, D.C., was a guest lecturer.

At the lecture, Mogahed spoke about the findings of the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding's 2018 American Muslim Poll.

“The first thing that we discovered is that the majority of Americans actually support Muslim civil rights. However, islamophobia does exist, and it’s linked to things that most of us probably don’t want,” Mogahed said. “Like the approval of authoritarianism, condoning violence and anti-Muslim discrimination.” 

Mogahed said the survey showed that, more often than not, American Muslims are more likely to condemn acts of violence than someone of any other faith. 

Mogahed cited a survey that was conducted elsewhere that concluded that the majority of American fatalities at the hands of extremists are the result of right-wing terrorists, not from extremists acting in the name of Islam.

“Someone perceived to be Muslim who is accused of a terrorism plot, who didn’t carry it out, they were just accused, will receive 770 percent more media coverage than someone accused of a very similar plot that was going to be carried out in the name of a different ideology,” she said.

In the 46 percent of Muslim women who said they wore a hijab all the time, the majority said that the reason they wore it is because they view it as a religious obligation and not because someone was forcing them to.

The results of the survey, according to Mogahed, also show that Muslim women are far more likely to receive religious discrimination than not only Muslim men, but women of any other religion as well. 

“Despite all of these social costs to being Muslim or visibly Muslim, Muslims are among the most likely to say their faith is a source of happiness,” Mogahed said.

Mogahed mentioned in her speech that most Muslims are proud of their faith, and that a stronger religious identity correlates with a stronger American identity.

Mogahed said islamophobia is only hurting the American way of life.

At the age of 15, Mogahed stumbled upon the autobiography of Malcolm X at her school library in Madison, Wisconsin. She credits the discovery of this book for changing her life.

“By reading this book, by discovering the life story and the transformation of Malcolm X, I discovered that my identities, I was a Muslim, I was of Egyptian origin, I was an America, that these things were not opposites, these things were not competing identities. 

They were one in the same, they were a part of each other. Malcolm X personifies this concept, this idea, that my faith and my passion for social justice were in perfect harmony,” Mogahed said.

With this appointment, she was invited to testify in front of the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations about the nation's engagement with Muslim communities. 

In 2016, Mogahed gave a TED talk about what it’s like to be a Muslim in America. This was considered to be one of the best TED talks of the year.

As the director of research at the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding, Mogahed spearheaded a national survey of major religions in America to understand what ordinary people think about those who practice Islam.

Dalia Mogahed is Chairman and CEO of Mogahed Consulting, a Washington, D.C. based executive coaching and consulting firm specializing in Muslim societies and the Middle East. 

She is also the Director of Research at the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding (ISPU). 

Dalia was appointed to President Obama’s Advisory Council on Faith Based and Neighborhood Partnerships, where she served on the Inter-religious Dialogue and Cooperation Task Force. She was invited to testify before the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations about U.S. engagement with Muslim communities, and she provided significant contributions to the Homeland Security Advisory Council’s Countering Violent Extremism Working Group recommendations.

She is also widely known for her TED Talk, “What it’s like to be Muslim in America” in which she asks viewers to fight negative perceptions of her faith in the media, and to choose empathy over prejudice.

What is islamophobia?

Islamophobia is a term for prejudice against, hatred towards, or fear of the religion of Islam or Muslims. 

Mogahed’s talk entitled, “Islamophobia: A Threat to All” illustrated how islamophobia opens the door to other forms of bigotry.  She explained the ways in which islamophobia, racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism and other prejudices are all inextricably linked. In her talk, Mogahed deconstructed islamophobia in America specifically. Why is there so much islamophobia in America? She speculated that one of the biggest reasons is terrorism. She looked at American public opinion of Islam and data of terrorist attacks between 2001-2013. She reports that islamophobia spiked in the run up  to the Iraq War and before 2 election cycles, but not just as a function of  actual terrorist attacks. Mogahed suggested that Islamophobia is a thriving industry in the U.S. and our media is biased in the content it produces in an effort to increase fear within consumers. Mogahed analyzed that 80% of the media content surrounding Islam is negative in comparison to 73% pertaining to North Korea, a designated Enemy of the State.

Stating, “Fear makes us more accepting of authoritarianism, prejudice, and conformity, “ Mogahed put forth that Islamophobia in the West has added more fuel to the fire; however, it is important to note that islamophobia transcends Islam. 

In terms of ethnicity, Islam is the most diverse religion. There is no such thing as a “typical” Muslim. 

Muslims with strong religious identity are more likely to have a strong American identity; piety equates to patriotism. 

Additionally, Mosque attendance is linked to greater civic engagement. 

Mogahed wrapped up her talk with a list of five “to-do’s” for those in attendance. 1) Challenge bigotry. She noted the importance of preaching to those who are not in the choir. Many of the audience members were there on their own accord and she urged us to educate our friends (Facebook and real), colleagues, and peers who were not in the room about the far-reaching consequences of islamophobia. 2) Call out bias media coverage. Mogahed encouraged the audience to not only post about biases on social media, but to also reach out to journalists and editors who publish the content. 3) Recognize Muslim contributions to America. It is essential that we realize the positive impacts of Muslims in our environments. 4) Build coalitions for a stronger more pluralistic America. During a time in which is seems as though all oppressed groups are under attack, it is essential that coalitions are made, bridges are built, and gaps are closed. Black Lives Matter, LGBTQ Rights, and Women’s Rights all have a place in the fight against islamophobia, and the intersectionality of minority oppression can be used to create stronger resistance and change. And finally, 5) VOTE.

Fear should be replaced by looking at the vast ways in which Muslims contribute to society.

The mosque where Abe Ajrami’s Beyoncé-loving daughter was feted with other high school graduates, the mosque where his children went to religion classes, the mosque where he and his family went every Friday to pray and mingle over a potluck of seven-layer dip and spiced biryani, was gone.

My mother was a Unitarian Universalist, like Heidi, and she met her future husband in college and converted. My parents have raised five ambiguously tan American Muslim kids.

On the night the mosque was set on fire, January 28, 2017, Ajrami watched with others from this small Muslim community. They wept, hugged, and prayed. 

Only hours before, President Donald Trump, delivering on a campaign promise to stop Muslims from entering the United States, had issued an executive order aimed at barring anyone arriving from seven Muslim-majority countries.

The fire, allegedly set by an arsonist who has been charged with a hate crime, caused sections of the building to collapse. 

Only the copper domes and marble slabs carved with quotations from the Muslim holy book, the Quran, would survive. Ajrami took pictures and posted them online. “We will rebuild, with LOVE!” he captioned them. 

It went viral. Within days the mosque raised a million dollars. The town rallied to support them. And even today they still get checks in the mail.

In the ashes of his mosque, Ajrami clearly saw the task ahead. “I didn’t want that label, Muslim, to define me as a person. But because of the fire we really had to be on the front lines,” he says. Ajrami made himself available to the media and gave talks on his faith, becoming a spokesman despite his misgivings.

“You have to take deep breaths because at some point you do start to question yourself,” he says. “Why am I doing this? Why do I have to prove to you that I’m a good guy?”

Today an estimated 3.45 million Muslims in America are living in a climate of hostility, their faith distorted by violent extremists on one end and an anti-Muslim movement on the other. The rise in animosity was stoked by fiery anti-Muslim rhetoric from conservative commentators and politicians, including the president. 

Trump repeatedly has described Islam as a threat, retweeting anti-Muslim videos from a British hate group and keeping his distance from the religion, like when he decided the White House, for the first time in more than two decades, would not host a dinner to mark Ramadan.

Ajrami’s mosque was one of more than 100 targeted last year with threats, vandalism, or arson across the country, according to the Council on American-Islamic Relations. 

Hate crimes are up. In 2016 the FBI documented a 19 percent increase in incidents against Muslims over the previous year. Muslim children report being bullied more than kids from other faiths, according to the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding, which studies Muslims in America. 

Half of American Muslims say that being Muslim has become more difficult in recent years, according to a Pew Research Center survey.

And yet Muslim communities in America are thriving. Modest clothes for women who cover their hair are being created by Muslims in the U.S. under labels like Haute Hijab and Austere Attire, and Macy’s is now selling fashion for Muslim women. 

Halal products, the Muslim equivalent of kosher, are available at Costco and Whole Foods. Mattel has even debuted a Muslim Barbie. The doll, complete with a head scarf, is modeled on Olympic fencer Ibtihaj Muhammad. 

There’s a Muslim liberal arts college in Berkeley, California, and a graduate school in Claremont, California. Community activism is thriving, and Muslim activists are forging alliances with other marginalized communities.

In reaction to feeling targeted, Muslims are getting political. 

Groups such as the Pluralism Project are supporting and training dozens of Muslim candidates in Maryland alone to run for office. 

A hijab-wearing Somali-American woman now sits in the House of Representatives in Minnesota; a Muslim man is running for governor of Michigan. There are two Muslims in Congress and more running in this year’s elections.

Relatively new immigrants and their children make up the largest portion of the faith’s adherents. Many prayer leaders across the country are foreign-born. But there’s also a growing number of Muslim leaders and scholars speaking in the language of a U.S.-raised generation of Muslims—black, white, brown—to translate a faith often seen as foreign into culturally relevant lingo. Almost half of Muslims in America were born here. The face of the faith in the United States is young; nearly half are millennials and came of age after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.

One of the leaders who speaks to that generation is Usama Canon, a half-black, half-white preacher from California. He converted in 1996 and studied with Islamic scholars in the United States and abroad.

“One of the great scholars said that Islam was kind of like a pure and clear water that takes the color of whatever riverbed it flows over,” Canon says, talking to me after an all-night lecture at a mosque in Houston. 


I’m hoping that Muslims in America can kind of color that bedrock in a beautiful way and can contribute to what is the American project in a way that when that water flows over it, it has a uniquely American and a distinctly American color and flavor but is authentic to itself as a faith tradition.

I visited Muslims in the South, West, Northeast, and Midwest. 

I met Bosnian Muslims in Chicago listening to a girls choir sing hymns praising the Prophet Muhammad. 

And I visited the mostly Arab Muslims in Dearborn, Michigan, where much of my father’s family lives. 

The mosque’s founder, Jaime “Mujahid” Fletcher, said Islam was his path to a better life after getting involved with gangs.

Latinos are one of the fastest growing Muslim populations in the country.

Any mapping of U.S. Muslims must include black American adherents, many of whom call themselves indigenous Muslims.

They make up at least a fifth of the country’s Muslims.

Islam is often referred to as hip-hop’s unofficial religion. 

How Muslims, Often Misunderstood, Are Thriving in America
They’re a vibrant and increasingly visible part of the tapestry in communities across the nation.
17 MINUTE READ
BY LEILA FADEL
PHOTOGRAPHS BY LYNSEY ADDARIO
This story appears in the May 2018 issue of National Geographic magazine. 

This story is part of Diversity in America, a National Geographic series covering racial, ethnic, and religious groups and examining their changing roles in 21st-century life. Tell us your story with #IDefineMe.
There was nothing to do but watch as the copper-domed building in the southern Texas oil town of Victoria burned down.

The mosque where Abe Ajrami’s Beyoncé-loving daughter was feted with other high school graduates, the mosque where his children went to religion classes, the mosque where he and his family went every Friday to pray and mingle over a potluck of seven-layer dip and spiced biryani, was gone.

IN COLLABORATION WITH NPR
Listen to Leila Fadel's series, “Muslim Americans: A New Generation,” on NPR's member stations starting April 12, and find the stories online here.
“I was trying not to break down,” says Ajrami, a Palestinian American who raced to the mosque after getting a phone call in the dead of night. He recounts the experience to me in his living room as his wife, Heidi, an American convert to Islam, sits to his right and his daughters, Hannah and Jenin, sit to his left, while his son, Rami, sleeps upstairs.

Get more of the inspiring photos and stories we're known for, plus special offers. 

Enter your email
By signing up for this email, you are agreeing to receive news, offers, and information from National Geographic Partners, LLC and our partners. Click here to visit our Privacy Policy. Easy unsubscribe links are provided in every email.

This family reminds me of my own. My father, from Lebanon originally, also came to the United States for an education and a better future, as Ajrami did. My mother was a Unitarian Universalist, like Heidi, and she met her future husband in college and converted. My parents have raised five ambiguously tan American Muslim kids.

Tune in to Hostile Planet Tonight at 9/8c

CONVERSATION: MUSLIMS IN AMERICA
Leila Fadel and Lynsey Addario will explore the culture and experiences of Muslims in America at National Geographic headquarters in Washington, D.C. on May 2, 2018.

 Picture of an Imam and another man standing inside a mosque that was burned 
Imam Fazal Hassan and Amjad Shaik survey damage to their mosque in Bellevue, Washington, after it was set on fire last year. A mentally ill man who had earlier assaulted a member of the mosque pleaded guilty but was not charged with a hate crime.
Born to a poor family in the Gaza Strip, Ajrami studied nursing because it was all he could afford. In 1994 a friend helped get him a visa and a scholarship to Clarkson College in Omaha, Nebraska. There he met Heidi, a Texas-born Army brat. He wooed her with picnics and jokes; she took him to his first football-watching party. They moved to Victoria when Heidi got a job there as a college English instructor. Ajrami became director of nursing at a hospital. He now runs a medical-staffing business, and the family lives in a large house with a pool. God is a big part of their lives, the way God is the center of most people’s lives in this town.

On the night the mosque was set on fire, January 28, 2017, Ajrami watched with others from this small Muslim community. They wept, hugged, and prayed. Only hours before, President Donald Trump, delivering on a campaign promise to stop Muslims from entering the United States, had issued an executive order aimed at barring anyone arriving from seven Muslim-majority countries.

The fire, allegedly set by an arsonist who has been charged with a hate crime, caused sections of the building to collapse. Only the copper domes and marble slabs carved with quotations from the Muslim holy book, the Quran, would survive. Ajrami took pictures and posted them online. “We will rebuild, with LOVE!” he captioned them. It went viral. Within days the mosque raised a million dollars. The town rallied to support them. And even today they still get checks in the mail.

 Picture of men holding platters with fish during a traditional Iraqi funeral
Friends and family in Dearborn, Michigan, hold a traditional martyr’s funeral for Ali Qasim al Khafaji, who was fighting with the Iraqi security forces when he was killed in Mosul by Islamic State militants. The attendees prepare to dine on masgouf, or grilled fish, an Iraqi specialty.
In the ashes of his mosque, Ajrami clearly saw the task ahead. “I didn’t want that label, Muslim, to define me as a person. But because of the fire we really had to be on the front lines,” he says. Ajrami made himself available to the media and gave talks on his faith, becoming a spokesman despite his misgivings.

“You have to take deep breaths because at some point you do start to question yourself,” he says. “Why am I doing this? Why do I have to prove to you that I’m a good guy?”

Today an estimated 3.45 million Muslims in America are living in a climate of hostility, their faith distorted by violent extremists on one end and an anti-Muslim movement on the other. The rise in animosity was stoked by fiery anti-Muslim rhetoric from conservative commentators and politicians, including the president. Trump repeatedly has described Islam as a threat, retweeting anti-Muslim videos from a British hate group and keeping his distance from the religion, like when he decided the White House, for the first time in more than two decades, would not host a dinner to mark Ramadan.

 
MUSLIMS IN AMERICA

PROGRESS IN SPITE OF PREJUDICE

Muslims in the United States are a racially and ethnically diverse group—and a growing one, despite a recent rise in anti-Muslim hostility. From dozens of different countries and representing multiple branches of their faith, Muslims now total about 3.45 million people, or one percent of the U.S. population. With roots dating back to the 16th century, the Muslim population is currently growing faster in suburbs than in cities, especially in southern and western regions. There are now more than 2,100 mosques in the U.S., up from 962 in 1994.

MUSLIM MOSAIC

Incidents of anti-Muslim vandalism, arson, harassment, and violence at mosques surged in 2015.

Muslim communities are growing across the United States, anchored by a rising number of mosques.

Arson or bombing attack against a mosque in 2017

STATISTICS FOR CITIES REPRESENT METROPOLITAN STATISTICAL AREAS; MOSQUES AND MUSLIM POPULATIONS IN HAWAII, ALASKA, AND U.S. TERRITORIES ARE NOT SHOWN.


The Ford Motor Company in the early 1900s attracted immigrants from all over, including the Middle East, to the Detroit area. The first Lebanese and Syrians there were mostly Christian.

Somalis fleeing civil war in the 1990s dominate the Muslim population of Minneapolis, the only U.S. city where the majority of Muslims come from a single country.

The fastest growing Muslim populations are in Texas, where the job market is strong and housing costs are low.

Muslim adults in the U.S. are about three times as likely as the general population to be immigrants or

the children of immigrant parents.

MARTIN GAMACHE AND MANUEL CANALES, NGM STAFF; KELSEY NOWAKOWSKI. 
SOURCES: IHSAN BAGBY, UNIVERSITY OF KENTUCKY; PEW RESEARCH CENTER; U.S. RELIGION CENSUS; COUNCIL ON AMERICAN-ISLAMIC RELATIONS
Ajrami’s mosque was one of more than 100 targeted last year with threats, vandalism, or arson across the country, according to the Council on American-Islamic Relations. Hate crimes are up. In 2016 the FBI documented a 19 percent increase in incidents against Muslims over the previous year. Muslim children report being bullied more than kids from other faiths, according to the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding, which studies Muslims in America. Half of American Muslims say that being Muslim has become more difficult in recent years, according to a Pew Research Center survey.

And yet Muslim communities in America are thriving. Modest clothes for women who cover their hair are being created by Muslims in the U.S. under labels like Haute Hijab and Austere Attire, and Macy’s is now selling fashion for Muslim women. Halal products, the Muslim equivalent of kosher, are available at Costco and Whole Foods. Mattel has even debuted a Muslim Barbie. The doll, complete with a head scarf, is modeled on Olympic fencer Ibtihaj Muhammad. There’s a Muslim liberal arts college in Berkeley, California, and a graduate school in Claremont, California. Community activism is thriving, and Muslim activists are forging alliances with other marginalized communities.

 Picture of hijabi women praying inside a large open stadium during the day
About 20,000 Muslims attended a morning prayer last year at Angel Stadium in Anaheim, California, to celebrate Eid al-Fitr. Muslims often dress up in their finest clothes on the holiday. The prayer… Read More
In reaction to feeling targeted, Muslims are getting political. Groups such as the Pluralism Project are supporting and training dozens of Muslim candidates in Maryland alone to run for office. A hijab-wearing Somali-American woman now sits in the House of Representatives in Minnesota; a Muslim man is running for governor of Michigan. There are two Muslims in Congress and more running in this year’s elections.

Relatively new immigrants and their children make up the largest portion of the faith’s adherents. Many prayer leaders across the country are foreign-born. But there’s also a growing number of Muslim leaders and scholars speaking in the language of a U.S.-raised generation of Muslims—black, white, brown—to translate a faith often seen as foreign into culturally relevant lingo. Almost half of Muslims in America were born here. The face of the faith in the United States is young; nearly half are millennials and came of age after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.

One of the leaders who speaks to that generation is Usama Canon, a half-black, half-white preacher from California. He converted in 1996 and studied with Islamic scholars in the United States and abroad.

“One of the great scholars said that Islam was kind of like a pure and clear water that takes the color of whatever riverbed it flows over,” Canon says, talking to me after an all-night lecture at a mosque in Houston. “And so I’m hoping that Muslims in America can kind of color that bedrock in a beautiful way and can contribute to what is the American project in a way that when that water flows over it, it has a uniquely American and a distinctly American color and flavor but is authentic to itself as a faith tradition.”

 Picture of a Pakistani Elvis impersonator at a picnic in Houston flanked by American and Texas flags
Airaj Jilani, a retired oil-and-gas project manager from suburban Houston, performs as Elvis Presley. He has been a fan since he was a boy growing up in Pakistan. “I was the Elvis fan. My brother was the… Read More
 Picture of hijabi girl scouts wearing their vests and standing inside during their troop meeting 
Jumana Mussa, Dana Mussa, Jana Hassan, and Marya Tailakh, Girl Scouts from Troop 3408 in Anaheim, California, perform an anti-bullying skit at a public library. Bullying of Muslim children in the United States is rising largely because of cultural and religious misunderstanding, according to an institute that studies issues affecting Muslims.
That color and flavor are coming from a mosaic of Muslim communities across the country like nothing I saw in over a decade of writing about the Muslim world. Islam is one of the most diverse faiths in the United States, with adherents from some 75 countries bringing distinct ways of worshipping. I visited Muslims in the South, West, Northeast, and Midwest. What I found was a variety of race, practice, class, culture, and language that I’d seen just once before—in Mecca, during the hajj, the pilgrimage that the roughly 1.8 billion Muslims around the world are obligated to make once in their lifetime.

My exploration of Islam in America led me to Sufi converts, mostly white, in rural Pennsylvania who meditate, praise God, and farm together at a spiritual retreat. In the ecolodge each room is named for an important word in Islam: Mercy, Courage, Praise, Love. It’s called the Farm of Peace, and it has a yogi, earthy vibe, so it’s not surprising that the imam, or prayer leader, does cupping therapy and acupuncture. He’s also the shepherd and the butcher on the 150-acre farm.

 Picture of an Imam walking on a farm holding a blue bucket and feeding sheep
Imam Jamil Bastress is the prayer leader and shepherd at the Farm of Peace, a spiritual retreat in Pennsylvania. When the time comes, he’s also the halal butcher. The goal here, he says, is to love the Earth and each other. Bastress is a convert to Islam, as are most members of this small Sufi community.
I met Bosnian Muslims in Chicago listening to a girls choir sing hymns praising the Prophet Muhammad. I went to the mosque my father attends, a largely South Asian Shiite congregation, next to a strip mall in a Chicago suburb. There’s a new digital lock on the door for an added layer of security. The imam urged congregants to vote, run for office, and get involved in community organizing and service. And I visited the mostly Arab Muslims in Dearborn, Michigan, where much of my father’s family lives. There people mix Arabic and English in local slang, signs are in both languages, and Middle Eastern cuisine is more common than pizza.

In Houston I spent time at the country’s first Spanish-language mosque, Centro Islamico. It opened its doors in 2016, and on the night I visited, more than a hundred people gathered to pray. Latinos are one of the fastest growing Muslim populations in the country. The mosque’s founder, Jaime “Mujahid” Fletcher, said Islam was his path to a better life after getting involved with gangs. He found the faith just before 9/11, so it was hard to explain his new religion to his Roman Catholic, Colombian family. There weren’t many Spanish books on Islam or Spanish-speaking scholars to dispel misconceptions. His mosque publishes those books now and webcasts sermons in Spanish, English, and Arabic.

 Picture of children sitting and standing on a bench outside a store waiting for a parent 
On an outing to the Showboat Drive-in Theater in Hockley, Texas, children from Centro Islamico in Houston wait while a parent buys them snacks. The mosque, which opened in 2016, serves Spanish-speaking Muslims.
Any mapping of U.S. Muslims must include black American adherents, many of whom call themselves indigenous Muslims. They make up at least a fifth of the country’s Muslims. Islam is often referred to as hip-hop’s unofficial religion. Praises to Allah, the Arabic word for God, and other phrases, such as assalamu alaikum, or peace be upon you, are in the lyrics of celebrated artists from the Roots and Rakim to a Tribe Called Quest. New York City’s Harlem is still home to historic Black Muslim communities with signs in their restaurants that say, “No Pork on My Fork.” And in Philadelphia, Arabic words from the faith such as salaam (peace) and zakat (alms) are uttered by Muslims and non-Muslims alike. In South Los Angeles, Jihad Saafir, an imam and son of a Black Muslim cleric, turned his father’s storefront mosque into a vibrant community center and school that teaches the history of Islam through the lens of empowerment and African and African-American history.

 Picture of a young girl playing on a cellphone as her family stands and sits around her
At an evening meal, Muslims from Chicago’s South Side break their Ramadan fast. Inner-City Muslim Action Network, a community organization formed two decades ago, sponsored the event. Rami Nashashibi, the organization’s founder, started it to promote social change, the arts, and healthy living in the city’s poorer neighborhoods.
It’s at Saafir’s mosque that Hamidah Ali sits next to me as we break our fast during Ramadan on halal Chinese food. I ask her what Islam in America is to her. She doesn’t hesitate. “Islam is cool,” the 27-year-old, African-American, second-generation Muslim says. Her hoop earrings peek out from her turban-wrapped head scarf, and she lists her idols, from hip-hop artists such as Yasiin Bey, formerly known as Mos Def, to America’s most famous Muslim, the late Muhammad Ali, who once said, “I am America. Only I’m the part you won’t recognize. But get used to me. Black, confident, cocky; my name, not yours; my religion, not yours; my goals my own—get used to me!” Ali was a controversial figure during his career—a conscientious objector to the Vietnam War, a proud Black Muslim popular among civil rights activists—but his pursuit of social justice later made him a cultural icon. His Muslim funeral in 2016 was broadcast on every major U.S. network. There’s even a book on the topic—Muslim Cool, by anthropologist Su’ad Abdul Khabeer. She writes on the Muslim identity formed at the intersection of black culture, hip-hop, and Islam.

 Picture of young Afghan-Americans eating at a pizzeria at night
Young Afghan Americans enjoy a night out at Big Al’s Pizzeria in Maywood, California, which specializes in halal beef and chicken toppings. The group—some of them friends, some meeting for the first time—was in the Los Angeles area to celebrate Nowruz, the Persian New Year, which falls on the spring equinox.
All of this is Islam in America. Canon, the preacher from California, says it’s one of the only places where pluralism openly flourishes, because Americans have the freedom to practice the religion in all its forms. As he talks to hundreds of mostly millennials in a Houston suburb at the Maryam Islamic Center—named for the Virgin Mary, the only woman mentioned by name in the Quran—he seamlessly switches from slang to jokes to quotes from the Quran. They ask him about how to handle customs that irk them: women being judged for wearing makeup in the prayer hall or immigrant parents who expect you to marry within the same culture. His answers come in candid stories that mix personal experiences with Islamic teachings about mercy, love, and respect.

 Photograph of a rapper performing under pink neon lights as the people raise their hands up 
Brother Ali, a white Muslim hip-hop artist, performs in his hometown of Minneapolis, Minnesota. Born with albinism, Jason Douglas Newman felt ostracized as a child by white children but accepted by black children, and he gravitated toward black culture. When he was 13, he met rapper KRS-One, who encouraged him to read The Autobiography of Malcolm X, which led to his decision to convert to Islam.
It’s the cornerstone of his organization, the Ta’leef Collective. With campuses in Fremont, California, and Chicago, Canon has tried to create a welcoming space that largely caters to younger Muslims and converts.

For American-born Muslims the mosque can sometimes feel like a foreign place, a mash-up of immigrants from many countries bringing different cultural references. And Islam, like all religions in America, is struggling to keep young people in the fold. “The aim was to create an environment with unreserved welcome that people can come to at their own pace,” Canon says, “and on frankly their own terms.”

 Picture of a Bangladeshi-American bridge holding a picture frame adorned with flowers
Ummey Ahmed, a Bangladeshi American, poses for photos at her family’s home in Hamtramck, Michigan, after she and Tazer Khan (below) were married in a traditional Bengali wedding ceremony.
 Picture of a groom standing with young children and his sisters at his Bengali wedding 
Tazer Khan takes the stage at the Athena Banquet Center in Roseville, Michigan, with his three brothers’ wives—Papia Jeani, Fatima Koli, and Ferdous Akthar—while he waits for his bride, Ummey Ahmed, to arrive for photographs at their wedding reception.
Islam has long been part of the tapestry of American identity; the first Muslims were brought here as slaves in the 16th century, many from West Africa. In the New World, 10 to 20 percent of slaves were Muslim, according to scholars. Barred from practicing their faith, they did it in secret, so clandestinely that scholars say Islam largely died out among the families that brought it here.

But elements of Islam were resurrected in African-American communities through black nationalist and civil rights movements as a tool of empowerment, seen as reclaiming a culture stripped from a people. It started with movements such as the Nation of Islam. But today the majority practices a more mainstream form of the faith, following the lead of Malcolm X and later Imam Warith Deen Mohammed. The son of Elijah Muhammad, the prominent Nation of Islam leader, Mohammed abandoned a black separatist narrative and is credited with bringing a more traditional practice to Black Muslims.

 Picture of men wearing traditional white outfits at a commemoration for Malcom X outside
On the anniversary of Malcolm X’s birthday, May 19, Muslims and non-Muslims make a pilgrimage to his grave at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York, following traditions that evolved in the years after… Read More
The first wave of Muslim immigrants in modern history began in the late 1800s; mostly from the Levant, they sought economic opportunities and settled largely in the Midwest. The first mosque was in North Dakota. Iowa is home to the oldest surviving place of worship built for Muslims, the Mother Mosque of America. But the door all but closed for Muslims in 1924, with an immigration act that barred people from Asia. In 1965 the next wave began, when new legislation reopened the U.S. to the world. That immigration continues today. The largest Muslim immigrant group hails from South Asia. There are now more than 2,100 mosques across the country.

But for some, having a mosque of their own is still elusive, like the Muslim families in rural Santa Clara County, south of San Jose, California.

 Picture of a surfer couple embracing as they sit in the sand with their boards 
At Huntington Beach in Southern California, Yousef Turshani, a pediatrician, and Nadeah Vali, a lawyer, enjoy a moment to themselves. The married couple are among a group of Muslim friends who occasionally meet to surf.
The area is a beautiful landscape of rolling hills and sheep farms. But the barn on Mohammed Idris Hussain’s farm in San Martin—where the retired Fijian-American Vietnam War veteran has lived with his family since the 1980s—is no longer for his sheep. It’s where the ethnically mixed South Valley Islamic Community prays.

It was supposed to be a temporary fix, to save the $1,500 a month in rent for a storefront in a strip mall. The community pooled its money, bought a piece of land, and drew up plans for the Cordoba Center. But the project quickly became a lightning rod. More than a decade after those first steps, the community now numbers about a hundred families, and they still squeeze into Hussain’s barn to worship.

THE MANY FACES OF ISLAM

Picture of a Marine sergeant wearing his awards standing for a portrait
Picture of a hijabi woman standing for a portrait in front of a tree
1/14
VIEW SLIDESHOW
Juan Pablo Osorio, who was born in Colombia and raised Roman Catholic, converted to Islam. The former Marine sergeant from Houston studied the faith while he served in Iraq and Afghanistan. “It helps me to live a life conscious of what’s right and wrong,” he says.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Lena Sareini, a Lebanese-American executive pastry chef, grew up in her family’s kitchen in Dearborn, Michigan. In her desserts she often incorporates recipes from her childhood and aspects of Lebanese cuisine. She says her heritage gives her an edge in her work.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Husain Ibn Muhammad Abdullah, an executive coach and retired professional football player who lives in Dallas, skipped a season so he could make a pilgrimage to Mecca with his wife, brothers, and parents.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Sarah Ahmad Waseeq, Safa McBride, and Jumada Muharram attend Centro Islamico in Houston.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Sabah Shams, who grew up in Dallas with parents from Pakistan and Bangladesh, identifies as queer and has grappled with connecting her faith to her identity and society’s expectations. “I am not nearly close to resolving this conflict,” she says. “I’m not sure I ever will, and somehow I’m OK with that.”
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Sarah Zaheer, a family physician who was born in Pakistan, and Elham Karajah, a nurse practitioner student who was born in Syria, take a break at a Muslim community clinic in Richland Hills, Texas. “I feel I live here with more freedom and courage than anywhere else in the world,” Karajah says. “That makes me a better Muslim and a better citizen.”
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Zahra Huber is reporter, editor, and producer for Detroit’s WWJ Newsradio 950. She grew up in New York City and moved to Michigan in 2002.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Chris Blauvelt and Amani Hammoud, with daughter Maryam, live in Dearborn. Blauvelt runs a crowdfunding platform for Muslim entrepreneurs, while Hammoud, who’s Lebanese American, is a stay-at-home mother.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Reginald Muhammad, an electrician, sells the Nation of Islam’s Final Call newspaper in Detroit.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Iman Saleh, whose parents are from Yemen, is a journalism student at Wayne State University in Detroit.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Yasar Bashir, a Pakistani American, was promoted to captain in the Houston Police Department last year. “Being a police officer makes me a better Muslim,” he says, “and being a Muslim makes me a better police officer.”
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Fatima Kebe, an industrial engineer from Dearborn, Michigan, whose parents are from Senegal, says, “My primary purpose in life is to worship God, so I am thankful to live in a country that supports freedom of religion."
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Ava Ansari, an artist, performer, and curator born in Tehran, is a co-founder of the Back Room, which arranges exchanges between artists and scholars in Iran and the United States.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
Kamilah Munirah Bolling and Adil Justin Cole stand outside their home in Farmington Hills, Michigan.
PHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE LAWRENCE
The community has spent about three million dollars trying to build this mosque, but the Islamic center is still just a blueprint in Sohail Akhter’s kitchen. The Pakistani American is the project manager. “Fearmongering is the greatest weapon that they’ve used against us because we’re so few,” he explains to me, saying that opponents have accused them of trying to build a terrorist training camp. “Not a lot of people here have ever met a Muslim. They associate all of us with that. They’re afraid.”

The main opponents are the Gilroy-Morgan Hill Patriots and the People’s Coalition for Government Accountability. The Patriots have posted anti-Muslim rhetoric on Facebook and sponsored an anti-Muslim speaker at the library and the town’s Lions Club to talk about his view that Islam is a threat to America.

The president of the Patriots says its opposition was never about Islam but about the environment. “The bottom line is these people came and bullied themselves into the neighborhood,” says Georgine Scott-Codiga. “All the traffic, all the cars, the noise. We want to protect that land.” But, she adds, she can understand people who worry that Muslims will change “the way of life.”

 Picture of a hijabi woman wearing pink and black riding a bicycle in front of a graffiti wall
Lindsay Tukes, 25, whose Muslim name is Amiraldeen Alghazali, rides home from her class on the Quran in Hamtramck, Michigan. Hamtramck, a city surrounded by Detroit, became the first city in the United States with a Muslim-majority population. Muslims are also a majority on the city council. The city once attracted immigrants from Poland and eastern Europe. Today large populations of immigrants are from Bangladesh, Iraq, Yemen, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and African countries.
Civil rights advocates say using environmental concerns is a tactic commonly employed by anti-Muslim groups to block mosques or Muslim cemeteries. Similar arguments have been used to block, or try to block, projects in Georgia, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Tennessee, and Texas.

In the first land-use meeting before the county planning commission in 2012, Akhter and others in the Muslim community were shouted down and told to go back to their countries.

“I’ve been here since 1990, and that was the first time I really felt scared,” Akhter says. “I grew up in Fort Wayne, Indiana, once a hotbed of KKK activity, and never saw this kind of stuff until post-9/11.”

Picture of a gubernatorial candidate preparing for an interview with his PR team 
Abdul El-Sayed, a Democratic candidate for governor in Michigan, records videos for his campaign. A doctor and the former Detroit Health Department director, El-Sayed, who is Egyptian American, hopes to become the nation’s first Muslim governor.
The fight over the mosque and the demonization of Muslims have had an effect on Akhter’s now grown American children. He’s watched as they have distanced themselves from the faith after being bullied at school and called terrorists. Nudrat, Akhter’s wife, a real estate agent, is afraid to show homes on her own now. “There are times I don’t feel safe; sometimes I go with him,” she says, pointing to her husband.

She’s worried people might react badly to her head scarf. There have been incidents that shocked her. “Once I was at the local Costco, and this lady came to me and handed me a small booklet and said, ‘You might enjoy reading this,’ ” she says. “I didn’t realize what it was, and when I opened it up, it was a whole Muslim comic book saying, ‘Oh, we’re going to kill everybody.’ It was all stuff making fun of Muslims, and I didn’t know what to do. It was so sudden.”

Picture of a woman in a leopard print hijab holding up her camera on a selfie stick
Amani Al-Khatahtbeh, who founded MuslimGirl.com as a high school senior, shoots a sizzle reel that she plans to use to pitch ideas for a TV show or web series. In 2017 the website, which says it’s “raising the… Read More
The contempt has been upsetting, Akhter says, but it’s also made Muslims here more resolute in defending their faith and their rights. “This is our home,” Akhter says. “Somebody comes and tells you to leave your home—are you going to quit? That’s the most absurd thought.”

Despite the troubles, Bakri Musa, a Malaysian-American surgeon in the community, says he prefers a lawsuit to the alternative. “I’d rather they sue us than they burn the mosque down. This is a quantifiable obstacle,” he says.

 Picture of a firefighter standing in front of his station as people walk by
Every morning Abdelrahman Abdelaziz (at left) greets neighbors at Squad 18’s firehouse in New York City’s West Village. The Palestinian American, a lieutenant on the force, sees himself as a little bit of an… Read More
That’s what Musa loves about being Muslim in America: The rights of expression and worship are protected. Here, he says, he can choose to be the kind of person, the kind of American, the kind of Muslim he wants to be. He points to his shelves at his rustic home on a sheep farm. They’re filled with books written by Shiite and Sunni scholars, reflecting the many schools of thought under those two main Islamic sects.

“This is the place to be a Muslim, scholarship without intervention,” he says. “In Malaysia I could go to jail because I have Shiite literature in my house, and in Malaysia that’s the equivalent of being a commie in America.”

 Picture of a family standing over the casket of a family member at his funeral in a mosque
Relatives and friends of Jamil Ibn Rafael, who lived in Detroit, pay their respects at a mosque in Dearborn, Michigan, before his burial. Indigent and 66, he died of unknown causes. He converted to Islam when he was in his 20s. For his sisters (one at left, two at far right), who are Christian, it was their first time in a mosque.
The day after we talked, the mosque rents out the community center to host an interfaith dinner with Jewish and Christian leaders, as well as guests. Musa and his wife, Karen, a Canadian American, sit next to a Jewish couple and explain the different South Asian foods being served. It’s something the community does a lot now—interfaith work, community outreach. Despite how loud their opponents are, they say they feel welcome in the community and are hopeful they’ll soon have a mosque of their own.

Many young Muslim Americans are tired of constantly having to explain themselves or speak for all Muslims. They’re searching for a place to belong that combines their faith and American sensibilities.

 Picture of a teacher leading a chanting crowd at a football game
Amanda Jaczkowski, 25, leads the crowd to cheer the Detroit City Football Club in a minor-league soccer game against the Dayton Dynamo Football Club. Born into a devoutly Catholic Polish-American family, she converted to Islam in her sophomore year of college. “To be honest,” she says, noting that she still listens to the same music and has the same best friend, “I don’t think I’ve changed that much.”
I meet Rami Nashashibi on West 63rd Street on the South Side of Chicago, where his Inner-City Muslim Action Network (IMAN) has operated for two decades. He stops traffic as he runs from the clinic and offices on one side of the street to the Mexican restaurant turned prayer room, cafeteria, and extra office space on the other.

The 46-year-old community activist founded this place to use Islam to serve the underserved. Now he’s built a coalition of Muslims—black, South Asian, Arab, white, Latino, some from the impoverished South Side, others from suburban communities—to use the faith to tackle the social issues that plague this neighborhood.

Nashashibi was born to nonreligious Arab parents and found his way to the faith, like many American converts, through hip-hop and the social justice movement. When speaking about IMAN, Nashashibi often quotes Imam Warith Deen Mohammed, a cleric he considers an inspiration who died in 2008. “He best reflects the tradition of Islam that resonates with me now,” he says. “The life-giving message of Islam. Islam as a source of mercy, a source of reconciliation.”

 Picture of children getting ice cream from a colorful truck
In Hamtramck, Michigan, children flock to an ice-cream truck to buy cool treats. In this neighborhood most of the children have parents who came from Yemen. The city (population 21,750), which is surrounded by Detroit, has a mostly Muslim population, and Muslims hold the majority on the city council.
Today Nashashibi and the staff at IMAN work with corner-store owners to bring fresh food and a more inviting environment—things like no bars on the windows—to food deserts in low-income neighborhoods. They get residents involved in community organizing, provide free medical services, and run a reentry program for former inmates who leave prison with a few dollars and often no family support.

I visit during Ramadan, the busiest time of year at IMAN. To break this day’s fast, a community dinner is served in the parking lot behind the clinic. Vendors hawk cold-pressed juices, bean pies, and colorful jewelry. The guests are from the neighborhood: community organizers, politicians, faith leaders, and friends. In the background the graffiti mural on IMAN’s building has a verse from the Quran. “Is there any reward for good other than good?”

Nashashibi addresses the crowd. “Whether we’re delivering health care or building houses, we understand that you have to do it by building power, building relationships, building alliances,” he says. “You will continue to see us—as we have, ever since this election—use the hashtag ‘Fight Fear, Build Power’ as the ultimate response to the moment that we’re in.”

“I want to hear it,” he tells the crowd. “Fight fear!” he calls. The crowd shouts, “Build power!”

 Picture of a music producer sitting and smoking inside a dim room with her boyfriend and a woman
An Iranian-American music producer known as Metal Sanaz unwinds in her Los Angeles studio. She was raised in a family that does not practice. Muslims, like adherents of all faiths, range from secular to devout. Some jokingly call themselves Ramadan Muslims, praying only during the holy month.
The next day a group from IMAN heads to a corner store, Morgan Mini Mart, for an event called Refresh the ’Hood. Outside an emcee tweaks the words to a Tupac song, rapping, “The sweeter the juice, the deeper the roots.” To passersby, volunteers hand out fresh smoothies and mango salsa made from produce sold inside.

Sadia Nawab, the 28-year-old arts-and-culture manager for IMAN, sits on the ground outside the store with a pair of teens painting trash cans to beautify the place. Her hair is covered in a stylish multicolored head wrap knotted at the top, her nose pierced.

Nawab grew up culturally confused. She’s the daughter of parents from Pakistan, she was raised in a largely Arab immigrant suburb of Chicago, and she went to a mostly white school but identified with various cultures, including black culture and hip-hop. “I knew I was Muslim,” she says. “I just didn’t know what it meant. And people put you in boxes: Arab, Muslim, immigrant, doesn’t speak English. I didn’t know how I fit in.”

Through IMAN she began to figure out what being Muslim meant to her. She found her way back to her faith. “It had this transformative effect on me, working in the trenches of the South Side of Chicago,” she says. “I was able to thrive, emotionally and mentally. I was 17 when I started volunteering, and that’s a precious age.” She says she needed mentors who understood her as an American Muslim teen. That’s what she found at IMAN. “Here I don’t always feel like an outsider. It feels natural,” she says.

 Picture of a young women fashion designer laughing with her friends on the hills of L.A
Marya Ayloush laughs as she oversees a fashion shoot in Los Angeles for her online hijab company, Austere Attire. Ayloush will use the photos to market her clothing on social media and her website. The business of creating modest fashion for religious women has taken off in the United States.
IMAN is a way to make Islam relevant to American Muslims, Nashashibi says, especially those searching for a purpose and a connection to a faith so often portrayed as a foreign threat on American television. For this work he was recognized last year with a prestigious MacArthur Foundation “genius” award. “We’re trying to celebrate the legacy of the spirit of a transformational, empowering, inspirational Islam that is not constantly trying to apologize and explain itself,” he says.

It’s the antidote, he says, to the apathy that leads people away from the faith or the vulnerability, disenfranchisement, and anger that lead people to violence, be it on the South Side of Chicago or the battlefields in Syria and Iraq. And America, he says, is the best place to be a Muslim today. “America has always provided, even in its darkest hours, spaces through which people have challenged it to live up to unfulfilled ideals.”

#BlackoutEid: Celebrating being black and Muslim
Why we need black Muslim spaces and hashtags like #BlackoutEid.

On Tuesday, celebrations started for the three-day Eid al-Fitr holiday, marking the end of the holy month of Ramadan. Muslims around the world are commemorating the holiday with a variety of special traditions, including my personal favourite - the Eid selfie.

The Eid selfie and the myriad of hashtags that go along with it emerged as a way for Muslims to showcase their Eid fashions and celebrations. In many Muslims communities, it is a tradition to dress up in your best outfit for Eid.

Social media platforms have been quick to respond to the growing popularity of the Eid selfie. Snapchat, for example, has special stickers and filters for the holiday, while Twitter adds Eid selfies to its Holiday Moment when hashtags such as #EidMubarak and #HappyEid start trending.

While the growing popularity of the Eid selfie has contributed to promoting a positive image of Muslims in the United States and elsewhere, it has not really been able to capture the racial, ethnic, and cultural diversity of the Muslim world. #BlackoutEid, a hashtag that specifically highlights black Muslim fashion, has sought to remedy that.

Created by Aamina Mohamed, a producer and screenwriter based in Minnesota, #BlackoutEid encourages black Muslims to share selfies of their Eid outfits and festivities. The hashtag, inspired by #BlackoutDay, was born out of a realisation that the clothing, celebrations, and traditions of black Muslims were not being shared with the same frequency and enthusiasm as those of non-Black members of the community.

Despite representing a fifth of Muslims in the US alone, black Muslims are often invisible in customary representations of the Muslim community. At the same time, they are constantly challenged to negotiate their blackness and their faith when specific black clothing styles, such as the turban, forms of art and cultural expressions are declared "un-Islamic".

Black Muslims in the US often find themselves having to fight on two fronts. Outside of the Muslim community, they battle with Islamophobia. Inside of the Muslim community, they wrestle with anti-Black racism. Every so often, the two fronts merge and they are left without a resting place, constantly on their guard against forces which threaten their mental and physical wellbeing.

It is, therefore, hardly surprising that #BlackoutEid has had such resonance. In fact, it has come to represent more than a hashtag: It is now a catalogue, a community and a space, which reaffirms that being black and Muslim are not mutually exclusive.

For me, #BlackoutEid has been a rare opportunity to engage with my faith without the burden of separating or mitigating my blackness. I have been an active member of the Muslim community, going to mosques, joining Muslim student associations, etc. But in these spaces, I have often felt I have had to contain my blackness or explain it in order to fit in. I would often deal with an onslaught of microaggressions or pressure to prove my faith in places that I am supposed to feel accepted and at ease. It has been disheartening to constantly have my guard up in my own religious community and feel that I have not been fully embraced.

Before Aamina started the hashtag, I was a regular contributor to #BlackoutDay, a selfie-day and quarterly call-to-action which began on Tumblr. Like #BlackoutEid, #BlackoutDay was a movement to celebrate and redefine blackness. Four times a year, social media timelines flooded with vibrant images of black youth embracing their blackness, and as one of the participants, I was able not only to make connections with other black creatives but also to curate my own relationship to my blackness.

Despite having this opportunity, I longed to incorporate my faith with the celebration of my identity. In a similar way to the Muslim spaces I have tried to navigate, predominantly black spaces, such as cultural and student organisations, were not entirely aware of the nuances and challenges that black Muslims face. Connecting to my blackness through my faith was not only something that was missing in my life but something I desperately needed, given the Islamophobia and anti-blackness that I have often faced.

#BlackoutEid was one of the first spaces I entered that did not make me choose between being black and being Muslim. Although my participation in #BlackoutEid was purely digital, it made up for the lack of healthy and supportive relationships I had faced in other communities. I felt connected to a larger black Muslim community that was invested in both my joy and the appreciation of my blackness.

#BlackoutEid has shed light on the need for spaces that focus on the experiences of black Muslims, and since its inception, several other digital and offline spaces of reaffirmation have emerged. #BlackinMSA, for example, started as a hashtag by the Muslim Anti-Racism Collaborative to highlight and process the discrimination and exclusion faced by black Muslim students in Muslim student associations. The hashtag received many responses on social media and eventually led to discussions on college campuses across the US.

#BlackIftar began as a Ramadan gathering for black Muslims and their friends to break fast, which quickly became a topic of conversation on social media and then transformed into a hashtag. Its founder, Samira Abderahman, created the event last year as a small dinner party for friends. Since then, it has spread to major cities such as Philadelphia, Atlanta, New York, Los Angeles, and Washington.

Like all spaces centred on Black Muslims, #BlackoutEid has not gone without criticism. One of the most frequent complaints against the hashtag has been that it reinforces racist attitudes and encourages segregation of Muslims along colour. Other spaces of reaffirmation such as #BlackIftar and the Black Muslim Psychology Conference have faced similar scrutiny.

What this criticism fails to take into account are the challenges, microaggressions, and burdens of representation that black Muslims face in Muslim spaces, which are often predominantly Arab or South Asian and attuned to their culture or customs. This criticism renders the hardships that black Muslims face invisible by downplaying the emotional exhaustion of being in a space where you do not feel accepted and at ease.

#BlackoutEid signals the importance of creating spaces that centre on marginalised communities, their well-being, and their happiness. These spaces give us the freedom to construct our own narratives and representations on their own terms and to simply be themselves. As eminent black Muslim scholar Su'ad Abdul-Khabeer has rightly pointed out, black Muslims have to advocate "do for self", "because our experience as Black people has taught us the mainstream is, by its very nature, a limited space, and at the end of the day, who better to represent us to the world than us?"

I’m Still Waiting for the First Black Spider-Man to Get His Own Movie
I loved Spider-Verse, but Miles Morales deserves to be the Spider-Man, not a Spider-Man.

My son Quinn virtually dragged me to see Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse. I went along because, as a father, it is my job to be interested in what he is interested in, but I thought I was over the Spider-Man origin stories. I was tired of the spider bite. Of the “Oh look, I have superpowers” realization and the “you have to learn to embrace who you are” storyline. It had gotten trite.

Or so I thought. Spider-Verse, I soon discovered, is one of the year’s best movies. The animation style, the story, the depth of character, and the music are all used to create a world like none other, and the cast—which includes Shameik Moore, Mahershala Ali, Nic Cage, Lily Tomlin, Brian Tyree Henry, Oscar Isaac, Hailee Steinfeld, Chris Pine, Liev Schreiber, Zoë Kravitz, and too many others to name—is as strong as any this year. On top of that, the film takes seriously what it feels like to be a black teenager in a predominately white and affluent school, and while I was not expecting the film to work on me as it did, I found myself getting misty-eyed in the movie theater. Quinn, meanwhile, smiled the whole time. He was having the time of his life. He loved seeing a Spider-Man who looked like him.  

Yet, while I loved the film, something kept me at a distance. It was not until I was home and thought about the movie critically that it became clear: Miles Morales, the movies’ first black Spider-Man, was the focus of the movie, yes, but he was a Spider-Man among Spider-Men.

When we meet Miles, he is the only Spider-Man left in New York City. In his dimension (just go with me, here), Peter Parker dies at the hands of the villain known as the Kingpin, and Miles is left to figure out how to be a hero on his own. That is a compelling premise. Spider-Verse could have taken this by now tired origin story and made it fresh by exploring the ways that, for a black Spider-Man, the story might be different. It could have delved deeper into the double consciousness of being a black person in an America that sees blackness as undesirable and a black man as something to be feared. (This is already a story about dual identities after all.) That would have kept with the way the character was introduced in 2011 in Chapter 4 of the Ultimate Fallout Marvel comic book series, which dealt with the aftermath of Peter Parker’s early death.

Miles Morales, the movies’ first black Spider-Man, was the focus of the movie, yes, but he was a Spider-Man among Spider-Men.
But Morales’ time as our lone webslinger doesn’t last long. Instead we are soon introduced to no less than four other characters who all have similar powers to Miles (one of which is, um, a pig) and who have more experience at being superheroes. (Yes, even the pig.) With that setup, the star of the film spends more than half of the movie’s running time being relegated to a character who must figure out how to be a superhero while the more seasoned characters look down on him in a way that feels, at times, condescending. (And yes, even Spider-Ham looks down on Miles.) To use another film that came out this year as a reference point, it was like if Black Panther had given as much screen time to Agent Everett K. Ross, the only white protagonist of the film, as it gave to Erik Killmonger and Black Panther. We got a movie, even if it is a very good one, that gestured toward blackness without fully embracing it—and that is a shame.

This film deserves a sequel, and given the money it is expected to make and the buzz surrounding the movie (which recently won Best Animated Film from the New York Film Critics Circle), my Spidey sense tells me they will make one. That’s a good thing. When the next film comes out, I’m sure Quinn will make me take him to that one just like he made me take him to this one. My only hope is that the first Afro-Latino Spider-Man will finally get his own movie, instead of having it hogged by, well, a hog. 

The Last Black Man in San Francisco Feels Like Something Utterly New

In the New Black Mirror Season’s Standout Episode, Virtual Reality Lets Straight Men Have Gay Sex
“Striking Vipers” opens up a space for queer desire but doesn’t know what to fill it with.

It’s easy to imagine a grim near-future in which Black Mirror perpetually chases the high of “San Junipero,” with diminishing returns. The Season 3 episode, which starred Mackenzie Davis and Gugu Mbatha-Raw as a queer couple who could’ve only found each other in cyberspace, was the first in the series to give its characters a happy ending, imparting a much-needed dose of tonal unpredictability to a show notorious for its dystopian paranoia and despair about technology. But creator Charlie Brooker, who has written or co-written every episode since the series’ sophomore year, whiffed his intended follow-up to “San Junipero.” In Season 4’s “Hang the DJ,” a romance pitted against a dating algorithm abruptly gave way to the deflating twist that we should’ve trusted the algorithm all along. The episode’s most startling reveal was how little Brooker seemed to understand what made the love story tick.

Black Mirror’s three-episode fifth season, which is now available, is its shortest of the Netflix seasons, not counting one-offs like December’s interactive “Bandersnatch.” Overall, the new entries are an underwhelming lot. Andrew “Hot Priest” Scott is betrayed by a particularly weak script in “Smithereens,” which doesn’t divulge its rather mundane tech phobia until the episode’s final minutes. Much more fun—but irrefutably silly and melodramatic—is “Rachel, Jack and Ashley Too,” starring Miley Cyrus as a pop star whose exploitation by a family member is aided by gizmos too theoretical to strike genuine fear. The standout episode is meant to be “Striking Vipers,” named after a Street Fighter–esque VR game in which two longtime but now-distant friends—family man Danny (Anthony Mackie) and perma-bachelor Karl (Yahya Abdul-Mateen II)—consummate an attraction to one another that neither man seems to realize he had harbored. In the digital guises of Lance (Ludi Lin), a Ryu-like martial artist with a hairless chest and bulging muscles on every surface of his compact body, and Roxette (Pom Klementieff), a Cammy-esque kickboxer with a platinum bob and black underwear peeking out of her short red dress, Danny and Karl find that their digital duels keep turning into mind-blowing sexual trysts. (The game, we’re told when they start throwing punches, “replicates all physical sensation.”)

Until its surprisingly unromantic resolution, “Striking Vipers” is one of the most ambitious and intriguingly enigmatic stories Black Mirror has ever told. [Spoilers ahead.] In contrast with most of the series, this installment resists giving us too many answers. We’re never quite sure what exactly the nature of Danny and Karl’s attraction is, for instance, or how the former’s differs from the latter’s. Foremost, it’s unclear whether the pals have sublimated their homosexual desire for one another into more socially acceptable targets (i.e., Danny’s wife, Theo, and Lance’s eyebrow-raisingly younger girlfriend, Daisy, played by Nicole Beharie and Monique Cynthia Brown, respectively), or whether the two men are only into each other as a (Asian, accented, athletic, aggressive, hella cheesy-looking) straight couple. We also never learn which elements play a role in their relationship: the secrecy, the escapism, the novelty, the role-play, their yearslong friendship, the safety of a game world free from prying eyes, the fluidity between homosociality and homoeroticism, the uncertainty of the genders, races, sexual orientations involved, and/or the ability to blur any and all categories. (Whew.) What we do know is that Theo and Daisy feel sexually neglected—with Theo suspicious that her husband’s having an affair—and that Danny is reluctant to blow up his nuclear family if his attraction to Lance isn’t “real.”

Send me updates about Slate special offers.
By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms.
Do their touchless affairs even count as cheating? For most of the hour, “Striking Vipers” hums along on a delicious uncertainty, unfettered by Brooker’s customary didacticism. Eventually, though, the episode’s underwrittenness begins to sink the romance. Danny and Karl decide to meet up in person to gauge their physical attraction to one another in real life, and Karl, who’d enjoyed the “best sex of [his] life” with Lance, decidedly doesn’t enjoy their kiss. With Danny, the matter of his gratification is more unsettled—both the camera and Mackie play it coy. It’s at that pivotal juncture, when the emotional disjunct between the men is never more character-revealing, that it hits us how little we know about their IRL relationship to one another.

The conclusion of “Striking Vipers” is one in which technology assists in the queering and opening up of the central trio, to the satisfaction of each individual’s wants. Danny gets to stay in his heterosexual marriage, not least for his kids’ sake, and enjoy scheduled flings with his friend. Karl realizes that, when he isn’t with Danny, he prefers the company of his new cat to Daisy’s. And Theo, who had felt sexually stifled by her marriage, is free to pick up strangers on the nights when she and Danny have prearranged their strayings. The characters’ new situations flirt with ideas frequently associated with queerness—open marriages, a gay-ish affair, the ability to transition between male and female bodies—but the amorphousness of their relationship and the heavy emphasis on protecting Danny and Theo’s union make the ending feel less like a romantic micro utopia than an optimization of heterosexual marriage, one that eliminates the destabilizing threats of new urges and sexual exploration. Danny and Karl’s erotic ardor is ultimately domesticated and instrumentalized in the same way that Danny and Theo’s sex life was, at least temporarily, dedicated to maximizing her chances at getting pregnant. If we had a better understanding of what drew Danny and Karl to each other, we could better root for their relationship. But without those crucial details, it just feels like the best ending Black Mirror can give us is scheduled sex. 

Black music is an umbrella term that organizes music created, produced, or inspired by black people, people of African descent, including African music traditions and African popular music as well as the music genres of the African diaspora, including Afro-Caribbean music, Afro-Latino music, Afro-Brazilian music and African American music. These genres include negro spiritual, gospel, rumba, blues, bomba, jazz, salsa, R&B, samba, rock and roll, calypso, soul, cumbia, funk, ska, reggae, dub reggae, house, detroit techno, hip hop, gqom, afrobeat, funk carioca, and country.

Music is a monumental part of all cultures because it has the power to unify people and cross borders. Just one song can have the power to bring millions of people from different backgrounds together. Many genres of music originate from communities that have visible roots in Africa. In North America,, it was a way that the early slaves could express themselves and communicate when they were being forcibly relocated and when there were restrictions on what cultural activities they could pursue. In a time where their world was being turned upside down, music served as an escape and form of communication/expression for early black communities. The ability of music to act as a binding factor provides all culture's with a strong sense of connectivity. Loosely termed black music with no specificity with regards to genre as a definition in the United States started with its roots embodied in slave spirituals and gospel music.

The term for many coming from places of "black" origin can be perceived in a derogatory manner by cultures who see the term as a blurring of lines which ignores the true roots of certain peoples and their specific traditions. To refer to musical genres with strong African-American influence, such as hip hop music, is very limited in scope and is not adopted by academic institutions as a true category.

The African diaspora consists of the worldwide collection of communities descended from native Africans or Africa's peoples, predominantly in the Americas. Historically,[when?] ethnographers, historians, politicians and writers have used the term particularly to refer to the descendants of the West and Central Africans who were enslaved and shipped to the Americas via the Atlantic slave trade between the 16th and 19th centuries, with their largest populations in Brazil, the United States and Haiti.Some[quantify] scholars identify "four circulatory phases" of this migration out of Africa. Prior to the Atlantic slave trade, Arab traders took even more slaves from other parts of Africa, selling them to markets in North Africa and the Middle East (Western Asia).

The phrase African diaspora was coined[by whom?] during the 1990s[30] and gradually entered common usage at the turn of the 21st century. The term diaspora originates from the Greek διασπορά (diaspora, literally "scattering") which gained popularity in English in reference to the Jewish diaspora before being more broadly applied to other populations.[31]

Less commonly, the term has been used in scholarship to refer to more recent emigration from Africa.[32] The African Union (AU) defines the African diaspora as consisting: "of people of native African origin living outside the continent, irrespective of their citizenship and nationality and who are willing to contribute to the development of the continent and the building of the African Union". Its constitutive act declares that it shall "invite and encourage the full participation of the African diaspora as an important part of our continent, in the building of the African Union".[33] For prehistoric and recent migration from Africa, see recent African origin of modern humans and emigration from Africa respectively.

Much of the African diaspora was dispersed throughout the Americas, Europe, and Asia during the Atlantic and Arab slave trades. Beginning in the 8th century, Arabs took African slaves from the central and eastern portions of the continent (where they were known as the Zanj) and sold them into markets in the Middle East, the Indian subcontinent, and the Far East. Beginning in the 15th century, Europeans captured or bought African slaves from West Africa and brought them to the Americas and Europe. The Atlantic Slave Trade ended in the 19th century, and the Arab Slave Trade ended in the middle of the 20th century[34] (although pockets of slavery still exist into the 21st century, such as the Haratin in Mauritania). The dispersal through slave trading represents the largest forced migrations in human history. The economic effect on the African continent was devastating, as generations of young people were taken from their communities and societies were disrupted. Some communities created by descendants of African slaves in the Americas, Europe, and Asia have survived to the modern day. In other cases, blacks intermarried with non-blacks, and their descendants are blended into the local population.

In the Americas, the confluence of multiple ethnic groups from around the world created multi-ethnic societies. In Central and South America, most people are descended from European, Amerindian, and African ancestry. In Brazil, where in 1888 nearly half the population was descended from African slaves, the variation of physical characteristics extends across a broad range. In the United States, there was historically a greater European colonial population in relation to African slaves, especially in the Northern Tier. There was considerable racial intermarriage in colonial Virginia, and other forms of racial mixing during the slavery and post-Civil War years. Jim Crow and anti-miscegenation laws passed after the Reconstruction era in the South in the late nineteenth century, plus waves of vastly increased immigration from Europe in the 19th and 20th centuries, maintained some distinction between racial groups. In the early 20th century, to institutionalize racial segregation, most southern states adopted the "one drop rule", which defined and recorded anyone with any discernible African ancestry as black, even of obvious majority white or Native American ancestry.[35] One of the results of this implementation was the loss of records of Native-identified groups, who were classified only as black because of being mixed race.

From the very onset of Spanish exploration and colonial activities in the Americas, Africans participated both as voluntary expeditionaries and as involuntary laborers.[28][36] Juan Garrido was such an African conquistador. He crossed the Atlantic as a freedman in the 1510s and participated in the siege of Tenochtitlan.[37] Africans had been present in Asia and Europe long before Columbus's travels. Beginning in the late 20th century, Africans began to emigrate to Europe and the Americas in increasing numbers, constituting new African diaspora communities not directly connected with the slave trade.

Africa is the world's second largest and second most-populous continent, being behind Asia in both categories. At about 30.3 million km2 (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 6% of Earth's total surface area and 20% of its land area.[3] With 1.2 billion people[1] as of 2016, it accounts for about 16% of the world's human population. The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos. It contains 54 fully recognised sovereign states (countries), nine territories and two de facto independent states with limited or no recognition.[4] The majority of the continent and its countries are in the Northern Hemisphere, with a substantial portion and number of countries in the Southern Hemisphere.

Africa's average population is the youngest amongst all the continents;[5][6] the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4.[7] Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria is its largest by population. Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors as well as later ones that have been dated to around 7 million years ago, including Sahelanthropus tchadensis, Australopithecus africanus, A. afarensis, Homo erectus, H. habilis and H. ergaster—the earliest Homo sapiens (modern human), found in Ethiopia, date to circa 200,000 years ago.[8] Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.[9]

Today, Africa contains 54 sovereign countries, most of which have borders that were drawn during the era of European colonialism. Since colonialism, African states have frequently been hampered by instability, corruption, violence, and authoritarianism. The vast majority of African states are republics that operate under some form of the presidential system of rule. However, few of them have been able to sustain democratic governments on a permanent basis, and many have instead cycled through a series of coups, producing military dictatorships.

Great instability was mainly the result of marginalization of ethnic groups, and graft under these leaders. For political gain, many leaders fanned ethnic conflicts, some of which had been exacerbated, or even created, by colonial rule. In many countries, the military was perceived as being the only group that could effectively maintain order, and it ruled many nations in Africa during the 1970s and early 1980s. During the period from the early 1960s to the late 1980s, Africa had more than 70 coups and 13 presidential assassinations. Border and territorial disputes were also common, with the European-imposed borders of many nations being widely contested through armed conflicts.


South African paratroops on a raid in Angola during the South African Border War
Cold War conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union, as well as the policies of the International Monetary Fund,[citation needed] also played a role in instability. When a country became independent for the first time, it was often expected to align with one of the two superpowers. Many countries in Northern Africa received Soviet military aid, while others in Central and Southern Africa were supported by the United States, France or both. The 1970s saw an escalation of Cold War intrigues, as newly independent Angola and Mozambique aligned themselves with the Soviet Union, and the West and South Africa sought to contain Soviet influence by supporting friendly regimes or insurgency movements. In Rhodesia, Soviet and Chinese-backed leftist guerrillas of the Zimbabwe Patriotic Front waged a brutal guerrilla war against the country's white government. There was a major famine in Ethiopia, when hundreds of thousands of people starved. Some claimed that Marxist economic policies made the situation worse.[71][72][73] The most devastating military conflict in modern independent Africa has been the Second Congo War; this conflict and its aftermath has killed an estimated 5.5 million people.[74] Since 2003 there has been an ongoing conflict in Darfur which has become a humanitarian disaster. Another notable tragic event is the 1994 Rwandan Genocide in which an estimated 800,000 people were murdered. AIDS in post-colonial Africa has also been a prevalent issue.

In the 21st century, however, the number of armed conflicts in Africa has steadily declined. For instance, the civil war in Angola came to an end in 2002 after nearly 30 years. This coincided with many countries abandoning communist-style command economies and opening up for market reforms. The improved stability and economic reforms have led to a great increase in foreign investment into many African nations, mainly from China,[75] which has spurred quick economic growth in many countries, seemingly ending decades of stagnation and decline. Several African economies are among the world's fastest growing as of 2016. A significant part of this growth, which is sometimes referred to as Africa Rising, can also be attributed to the facilitated diffusion of information technologies and specifically the mobile telephone.[76] Migration from African nations has increased dramatically in the last decade.[77]

Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities, cultures and languages. In the late 19th century, European countries colonised almost all of Africa; most present states in Africa originated from a process of decolonisation in the 20th century. African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union, which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.

The early history of blacks in the Americas
Africans assisted the Spanish and the Portuguese during their early exploration of the Americas. In the 16th century some black explorers settled in the Mississippi valley and in the areas that became South Carolina and New Mexico. The most celebrated black explorer of the Americas was Estéban, who traveled through the Southwest in the 1530s.

The uninterrupted history of blacks in the United States began in 1619, when 20 Africans were landed in the English colony of Virginia. These individuals were not slaves but indentured servants—persons bound to an employer for a limited number of years—as were many of the settlers of European descent (whites). By the 1660s large numbers of Africans were being brought to the English colonies. In 1790 blacks numbered almost 760,000 and made up nearly one-fifth of the population of the United States.

Attempts to hold black servants beyond the normal term of indenture culminated in the legal establishment of black chattel slavery in Virginia in 1661 and in all the English colonies by 1750. Black people were easily distinguished by their skin colour (the result of evolutionary pressures favouring the presence in the skin of a dark pigment called melanin in populations in equatorial climates) from the rest of the populace, making them highly visible targets for enslavement. Moreover, the development of the belief that they were an “inferior” race with a “heathen” culture made it easier for whites to rationalize black slavery. Enslaved blacks were put to work clearing and cultivating the farmlands of the New World.

Of an estimated 10 million Africans brought to the Americas by the slave trade, about 430,000 came to the territory of what is now the United States. The overwhelming majority were taken from the area of western Africa stretching from present-day Senegal to Angola, where political and social organization as well as art, music, and dance were highly advanced. On or near the African coast had emerged the major kingdoms of Oyo, Ashanti, Benin, Dahomey, and the Congo. In the Sudanese interior had arisen the empires of Ghana, Mali, and Songhai; the Hausa states; and the states of Kanem-Bornu. Such African cities as Djenné and Timbuktu, both now in Mali, were at one time major commercial and educational centres.

With the increasing profitability of slavery and the slave trade, some Africans themselves sold captives to the European traders. The captured Africans were generally marched in chains to the coast and crowded into the holds of slave ships for the dreaded Middle Passage across the Atlantic Ocean, usually to the West Indies. Shock, disease, and suicide were responsible for the deaths of at least one-sixth during the crossing. In the West Indies the survivors were “seasoned”—taught the rudiments of English and drilled in the routines and discipline of plantation life.

Slavery in the United States
Black slaves played a major, though unwilling and generally unrewarded, role in laying the economic foundations of the United States—especially in the South. Blacks also played a leading role in the development of Southern speech, folklore, music, dancing, and food, blending the cultural traits of their African homelands with those of Europe. During the 17th and 18th centuries, African and African American (those born in the New World) slaves worked mainly on the tobacco, rice, and indigo plantations of the Southern seaboard. Eventually slavery became rooted in the South’s huge cotton and sugar plantations. Although Northern businessmen made great fortunes from the slave trade and from investments in Southern plantations, slavery was never widespread in the North.

Crispus Attucks, a former slave killed in the Boston Massacre of 1770, was the first martyr to the cause of American independence from Great Britain. During the American Revolution, some 5,000 black soldiers and sailors fought on the American side. After the Revolution, some slaves—particularly former soldiers—were freed, and the Northern states abolished slavery. But with the ratification of the Constitution of the United States, in 1788, slavery became more firmly entrenched than ever in the South. The Constitution counted a slave as three-fifths of a person for purposes of taxation and representation in Congress (thus increasing the number of representatives from slave states), prohibited Congress from abolishing the African slave trade before 1808, and provided for the return of fugitive slaves to their owners.

In 1807 Pres. Thomas Jefferson signed legislation that officially ended the African slave trade beginning in January 1808. However, this act did not presage the end of slavery. Rather, it spurred the growth of the domestic slave trade in the United States, especially as a source of labour for the new cotton lands in the Southern interior. Increasingly, the supply of slaves came to be supplemented by the practice of “slave breeding,” in which women slaves were persuaded to conceive as early as age 13 and to give birth as often as possible.

Laws known as the slave codes regulated the slave system to promote absolute control by the master and complete submission by the slave. Under these laws the slave was chattel—a piece of property and a source of labour that could be bought and sold like an animal. The slave was allowed no stable family life and little privacy. Slaves were prohibited by law from learning to read or write. The meek slave received tokens of favour from the master, and the rebellious slave provoked brutal punishment. A social hierarchy among the plantation slaves also helped keep them divided. At the top were the house slaves; next in rank were the skilled artisans; at the bottom were the vast majority of field hands, who bore the brunt of the harsh plantation life.

With this tight control there were few successful slave revolts. Slave plots were invariably betrayed. The revolt led by Cato in Stono, South Carolina, in 1739 took the lives of 30 whites. A slave revolt in New York City in 1741 caused heavy property damage. Some slave revolts, such as those of Gabriel Prosser (Richmond, Virginia, in 1800) and Denmark Vesey (Charleston, South Carolina, in 1822), were elaborately planned. The slave revolt that was perhaps most frightening to slave owners was the one led by Nat Turner (Southampton, Virginia, in 1831). Before Turner and his co-conspirators were captured, they had killed about 60 whites.

Individual resistance by slaves took such forms as mothers killing their newborn children to save them from slavery, the poisoning of slave owners, the destruction of machinery and crops, arson, malingering, and running away. Thousands of runaway slaves were led to freedom in the North and in Canada by black and white abolitionists who organized a network of secret routes and hiding places that came to be known as the Underground Railroad. One of the greatest heroes of the Underground Railroad was Harriet Tubman, a former slave who on numerous trips to the South helped hundreds of slaves escape to freedom.

Free blacks and abolitionism
During the period of slavery, free blacks made up about one-tenth of the entire African American population. In 1860 there were almost 500,000 free African Americans—half in the South and half in the North. The free black population originated with former indentured servants and their descendants. It was augmented by free black immigrants from the West Indies and by blacks freed by individual slave owners.

But free blacks were only technically free. In the South, where they posed a threat to the institution of slavery, they suffered both in law and by custom many of the restrictions imposed on slaves. In the North, free blacks were discriminated against in such rights as voting, property ownership, and freedom of movement, though they had some access to education and could organize. Free blacks also faced the danger of being kidnapped and enslaved.

The earliest African American leaders emerged among the free blacks of the North, particularly those of Philadelphia, Boston, and New York City. Free African Americans in the North established their own institutions—churches, schools, and mutual aid societies. One of the first of these organizations was the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) church, formed in 1816 and led by Bishop Richard Allen of Philadelphia. Among other noted free African Americans was the astronomer and mathematician Benjamin Banneker.

Free blacks were among the first abolitionists. They included John B. Russwurm and Samuel E. Cornish, who in 1827 founded Freedom’s Journal, the first African American-run newspaper in the United States. Black support also permitted the founding and survival of the Liberator, a journal begun in 1831 by the white abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison. Probably the most celebrated of all African American journals was the North Star, founded in 1847 by the former slave Frederick Douglass, who argued that the antislavery movement must be led by black people.

Beginning in 1830, African American leaders began meeting regularly in national and state conventions. But they differed on the best strategies to use in the struggle against slavery and discrimination. Some, such as David Walker and Henry Highland Garnet, called on the slaves to revolt and overthrow their masters. Others, such as Russwurm and Paul Cuffe, proposed that a major modern black country be established in Africa. Supported by the American Colonization Society, whose membership was overwhelmingly white, African Americans founded Liberia in West Africa in 1822. Their ideas foreshadowed the development of Pan-African nationalism under the leadership of AME Bishop Henry M. Turner a half century later. However, most black leaders then and later regarded themselves as Americans and felt that the problems of their people could be solved only by a continuing struggle at home.

The extension of slavery to new territories had been a subject of national political controversy since the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 prohibited slavery in the area now known as the Midwest. The Missouri Compromise of 1820 began a policy of admitting an equal number of slave and free states into the Union. But the Compromise of 1850 and the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 (both grounded in the doctrine of popular sovereignty), along with the Supreme Court’s Dred Scott decision of 1857, opened all the territories to slavery.

Maps show the compromises over the extension of slavery into the territories: the areas affected by the Missouri Compromise (top), the Compromise of 1850 (center), and the Kansas-Nebraska Act (bottom).
Maps show the compromises over the extension of slavery into the territories: the areas affected by the Missouri Compromise (top), the Compromise of 1850 (center), and the Kansas-Nebraska Act (bottom).
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
By the end of the 1850s, the North feared complete control of the country by slaveholding interests, and whites in the South believed that the North was determined to destroy its way of life. White Southerners had been embittered by Northern defiance of the 1850 federal fugitive slave act and had been alarmed in 1859 by the raid at Harpers Ferry, Virginia (now in West Virginia), led by the white abolitionist John Brown. After Abraham Lincoln was elected president in 1860 on the antislavery platform of the new Republican party, the Southern states seceded from the Union and formed the Confederate States of America.

The Civil War, which ultimately liberated the country’s slaves, began in 1861. But preservation of the Union, not the abolition of slavery, was the initial objective of President Lincoln. He initially believed in gradual emancipation, with the federal government compensating the slaveholders for the loss of their “property.” But in September 1862 he issued the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring that all slaves residing in states in rebellion against the United States as of January 1, 1863, were to be free. Thus the Civil War became, in effect, a war to end slavery.

The Newberry Library, Ruggles Fund with the assistance of Robert Wedgeworth, 2002 (A Britannica Publishing Partner)
African American leaders such as author William Wells Brown, physician and author Martin R. Delany, and Douglass vigorously recruited blacks into the Union armed forces. Douglass declared in the North Star, “Who would be free themselves must strike the blow.” By the end of the Civil War more than 186,000 African American men were in the Union army. They performed heroically despite discrimination in pay, rations, equipment, and assignments as well as the unrelenting hostility of the Confederate troops. Slaves served as a labour force for the Confederacy, but thousands of them dropped their tools and escaped to the Union lines.
Reconstruction and after
As a result of the Union victory in the Civil War and the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution (1865), nearly four million slaves were freed. The Fourteenth Amendment (1868) granted African Americans citizenship, and the Fifteenth Amendment (1870) guaranteed their right to vote. Yet the Reconstruction period (1865–77) was one of disappointment and frustration for African Americans, for these new provisions of the Constitution were often ignored, particularly in the South.

After the Civil War, the freedmen were thrown largely on their own meagre resources. Landless and uprooted, they moved about in search of work. They generally lacked adequate food, clothing, and shelter. The Southern states enacted black codes, laws resembling the slave codes that restricted the movement of the former slaves in an effort to force them to work as plantation labourers—often for their former masters—at absurdly low wages.

The federal Freedmen’s Bureau, established by Congress in 1865, assisted the former slaves by giving them food and finding jobs and homes for them. The bureau established hospitals and schools, including such institutions of higher learning as Fisk University and Hampton Institute. Northern philanthropic agencies, such as the American Missionary Association, also aided the freedmen.

During Reconstruction, African Americans wielded political power in the South for the first time. Their leaders were largely clergymen, lawyers, and teachers who had been educated in the North and abroad. Among the ablest were Robert B. Elliott of South Carolina and John R. Lynch of Mississippi. Both were speakers of their state House of Representatives and were members of the U.S. Congress. Pinckney B.S. Pinchback was elected lieutenant governor of Louisiana and served briefly as the state’s acting governor. Jonathan Gibbs served as Florida’s secretary of state and superintendent of education. Between 1869 and 1901, 20 African American representatives and 2 African American senators—Hiram R. Revels and Blanche K. Bruce of Mississippi—sat in the U.S. Congress.

Courtesy of the Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
But black political power was short-lived. Northern politicians grew increasingly conciliatory to the white South, so that by 1872 virtually all leaders of the Confederacy had been pardoned and were again able to vote and hold office. By means of economic pressure and the terrorist activities of violent antiblack groups, such as the Ku Klux Klan, most African Americans were kept away from the polls. By 1877, when Pres. Rutherford B. Hayes withdrew the last federal troops from the South, Southern whites were again in full control. African Americans were disfranchised by the provisions of new state constitutions such as those adopted by Mississippi in 1890 and by South Carolina and Louisiana in 1895. Only a few Southern black elected officials lingered on. No African American was to serve in the U.S. Congress for three decades after the departure of George H. White of North Carolina in 1901.

The rebirth of white supremacy in the South was accompanied by the growth of enforced “racial” separation. Starting with Tennessee in 1870, all the Southern states reenacted laws prohibiting marriage between blacks and whites. They also passed Jim Crow laws segregating blacks and whites in almost all public places. By 1885 most Southern states had officially segregated their public schools. Moreover, in 1896, in upholding a Louisiana law that required the segregation of passengers on railroad cars, the U.S. Supreme Court in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson established the doctrine of “separate but equal.”

In the post-Reconstruction years, African Americans received only a small share of the increasing number of industrial jobs in Southern cities. And relatively few rural African Americans in the South owned their own farms, most remaining poor sharecroppers heavily in debt to white landlords. The largely urban Northern African American population fared little better. The jobs they sought were given to European immigrants. In search of improvement, many African Americans migrated westward.

During and after the Reconstruction period, African Americans in cities organized historical, literary, and musical societies. The literary achievements of African Americans included the historical writings of T. Thomas Fortune and George Washington Williams. The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass (1881) became a classic of autobiography. Blacks also began to make a major impact on American mass culture through the popularity of such groups as the Fisk Jubilee Singers.
From 1895 until his death in 1915, Booker T. Washington, a former slave who had built Tuskegee Institute in Alabama into a major centre of industrial training for African American youths, was the country’s dominant black leader. In a speech made in Atlanta in 1895, Washington called on both African Americans and whites to “cast down your bucket where you are.” He urged whites to employ the masses of black labourers. He called on African Americans to cease agitating for political and social rights and to concentrate instead on working to improve their economic conditions. Washington felt that excessive stress had been placed on liberal arts education for African Americans. He believed that their need to earn a living called instead for training in crafts and trades. In an effort to spur the growth of African American business enterprise, Washington also organized the National Negro Business League in 1900. But black businessmen were handicapped by insufficient capital and by the competition of white-owned big businesses.

Washington was highly successful in winning influential white support and became the most powerful African American in the country’s history at the time. But his program of vocational training did not meet the changing needs of industry, and the harsh reality of discrimination prevented most of his Tuskegee Institute graduates from using their skills. The period of Washington’s leadership proved to be one of repeated setbacks for African Americans: more blacks lost the right to vote, segregation became more deeply entrenched, and antiblack violence increased. Between 1900 and 1914 there were more than 1,000 known lynchings. Antiblack riots raged in both the South and the North, the most sensational taking place in Brownsville, Texas (1906); Atlanta (1906); and Springfield, Illinois (1908).

Meanwhile, African American leaders who opposed Washington’s approach began to emerge. The historian and sociologist W.E.B. Du Bois criticized Washington’s accommodationist philosophy in The Souls of Black Folk (1903). Others who questioned Washington’s methods included William Monroe Trotter, the militant editor of the Boston Guardian, and Ida B. Wells-Barnett, a journalist and a crusader against lynching. They insisted that African Americans should demand their full civil rights and that a liberal education was necessary for the development of black leadership. At a meeting in Niagara Falls, Ontario, in 1905, Du Bois and other black leaders who shared his views founded the Niagara Movement. Members of the Niagara group joined with concerned liberal and radical whites to organize the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP; initially known as the National Negro Committee) in 1909. The NAACP journal Crisis, edited by Du Bois, became an effective advocate for African American civil rights. The NAACP won its first major legal case in 1915, when the U.S. Supreme Court outlawed the “grandfather clause,” a constitutional device used in the South to disfranchise African Americans.

Black contributions to scholarship and literature continued to mount. Historical scholarship was encouraged by the American Negro Academy, whose leading figures were Du Bois and the theologians Alexander Crummell and Francis Grimké. Charles W. Chesnutt was widely acclaimed for his short stories. Paul Laurence Dunbar became famous as a lyric poet. Washington’s autobiography Up from Slavery (1901) won international acclaim.

The impact of World War I and African American migration to the North
When slavery was abolished in 1865, African Americans were an overwhelmingly rural people. In the years that followed, there was a slow but steady migration of African Americans to the cities, mainly in the South. Migration to the North was relatively small, with nearly eight million African Americans—about 90 percent of the total black population of the United States—still living in the South in 1900. But between 1910 and 1920, crop damage caused by floods and by insects—mainly the boll weevil—deepened an already severe economic depression in Southern agriculture. Destitute African Americans swarmed to the North in 1915 and 1916 as thousands of new jobs opened up in industries supplying goods to Europe, then embroiled in World War I. Between 1910 and 1920 an estimated 500,000 African Americans left the South.

African Americans who fled from the South soon found that they had not escaped segregation and discrimination. They were confined mainly to overcrowded and dilapidated housing, and they were largely restricted to poorly paid, menial jobs. Again there were antiblack riots, such as that in East St. Louis, Illinois, in 1917. But in the Northern cities the economic and educational opportunities for African Americans were immeasurably greater than they had been in the rural South. In addition, they were helped by various organizations, such as the National Urban League, founded in 1910.

Some African Americans opposed involvement in World War I. The black Socialists A. Philip Randolph and Chandler Owen argued that the fight for democracy at home should precede the fight for it abroad. But when the United States entered World War I in April 1917, most African Americans supported the step. During the war about 1,400 black officers were commissioned. Some 200,000 African Americans served abroad, though most were restricted to labour battalions and service regiments.

The Garvey movement and the Harlem Renaissance
Many African Americans became disillusioned following World War I. The jobs that they had acquired during the war all but evaporated in the postwar recession, which hit African Americans first and hardest. The Ku Klux Klan, which had been revived during the war, unleashed a new wave of terror against blacks. Mounting competition for jobs and housing often erupted into bloody “race riots” such as those that spread over the nation in the “red summer” of 1919.

In the face of such difficulties, a “new Negro” developed during the 1920s—the proud, creative product of the American city. The growth of racial pride among African Americans was greatly stimulated by the black nationalist ideas of Marcus Garvey. Born in Jamaica, he had founded the Universal Negro Improvement Association there in 1914. He came to the United States in 1917 and established a branch of the association in the Harlem district of New York City. By 1919 the association had become the largest mass movement of African Americans in the country’s history, with a membership of several hundred thousand.

The Garvey movement was characterized by colourful pageantry and appeals for the rediscovery of African heritage. Its goal was to establish an independent Africa through the return of a revolutionary vanguard of African Americans. Garvey’s great attraction among poor African Americans was not matched, however, among the black middle class, which resented his flamboyance and his scorn of their leadership. Indeed, one of Garvey’s sharpest critics was Du Bois, who shared Garvey’s basic goals and organized a series of small but largely ineffectual Pan-African conferences during the 1920s. The Garvey movement declined after Garvey was jailed for mail fraud in 1925 and deported to Jamaica in 1927.

The flowering of African American creative talent in literature, music, and the arts in the 1920s was centred in New York City and became known as the Harlem Renaissance. Like the Garvey movement, it was based on a rise in “race consciousness” among African Americans. The principal contributors to the Harlem Renaissance included not only well-established literary figures such as Du Bois and the poet James Weldon Johnson but also new young writers such as Claude McKay, whose militant poem “If We Must Die” is perhaps the most-quoted African American literary work of this period. Other outstanding writers of the Harlem Renaissance were the novelist Jean Toomer and the poets Countee Cullen and Langston Hughes. During the 1920s painters Henry Ossawa Tanner and Aaron Douglas and performers Paul Robeson, Florence Mills, Ethel Waters, and Roland Hayes were also becoming prominent. The black cultural movement of the 1920s was greatly stimulated by African American journals, which published short pieces by promising writers. These journals included the NAACP’s Crisis and the National Urban League’s Opportunity. The movement was popularized by African American philosopher Alain Locke in The New Negro, published in 1925, and by African American historian Carter G. Woodson, founder of the Association for the Study of Negro (now African American) Life and History and editor of the Journal of Negro History.

African American life during the Great Depression and the New Deal
The Great Depression of the 1930s worsened the already bleak economic situation of African Americans. They were the first to be laid off from their jobs, and they suffered from an unemployment rate two to three times that of whites. In early public assistance programs African Americans often received substantially less aid than whites, and some charitable organizations even excluded blacks from their soup kitchens.

This intensified economic plight sparked major political developments among African Americans. Beginning in 1929, the St. Louis Urban League launched a national “jobs for Negroes” movement by boycotting chain stores that had mostly black customers but hired only white employees. Efforts to unify African American organizations and youth groups later led to the founding of the National Negro Congress in 1936 and the Southern Negro Youth Congress in 1937.

Virtually ignored by the Republican administrations of the 1920s, black voters drifted to the Democratic Party, especially in the Northern cities. In the presidential election of 1928 African Americans voted in large numbers for the Democrats for the first time. In 1930 Republican Pres. Herbert Hoover nominated John J. Parker, a man of pronounced antiblack views, to the U.S. Supreme Court. The NAACP successfully opposed the nomination. In the 1932 presidential race African Americans overwhelmingly supported the successful Democratic candidate, Franklin D. Roosevelt.

The Roosevelt administration’s accessibility to African American leaders and the New Deal reforms strengthened black support for the Democratic Party. A number of African American leaders, members of a so-called “black cabinet,” were advisers to Roosevelt. Among them were the educator Mary McLeod Bethune, who served as the National Youth Administration’s director of Negro affairs; William H. Hastie, who in 1937 became the first black federal judge; Eugene K. Jones, executive secretary of the National Urban League; Robert Vann, editor of the Pittsburgh Courier; and the economist Robert C. Weaver.

African Americans benefited greatly from New Deal programs, though discrimination by local administrators was common. Low-cost public housing was made available to black families. The National Youth Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corps enabled African American youths to continue their education. The Works Progress Administration gave jobs to many African Americans, and its Federal Writers Project supported the work of many black authors, among them Zora Neale Hurston, Arna Bontemps, Waters Turpin, and Melvin B. Tolson.

The Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), established in the mid-1930s, organized large numbers of black workers into labour unions for the first time. By 1940 there were more than 200,000 African Americans in the CIO, many of them officers of union locals.
In World War II as in World War I, there was a mass migration of blacks from the rural South; collectively, these population shifts were known as the Great Migration. Some 1.5 million African Americans left the South during the 1940s, mainly for the industrial cities of the North. Once again, serious housing shortages and job competition led to increased tension between blacks and whites. Race riots broke out; the worst occurred in Detroit in June 1943.

During the war, which the United States had entered in December 1941, a large proportion of African American soldiers overseas were in service units, and combat troops remained segregated. In the course of the war, however, the army introduced integrated officer training, and Benjamin O. Davis, Sr., became its first African American brigadier general. In 1949, four years after the end of World War II, the armed services finally adopted a policy of full integration. During the Korean War of the early 1950s, blacks for the first time fought side by side with whites in fully integrated units.

The civil rights movement
At the end of World War II, African Americans were poised to make far-reaching demands to end racism. They were unwilling to give up the minimal gains that had been made during the war.

The campaign for African American rights—usually referred to as the civil rights movement or the freedom movement—went forward in the 1940s and ’50s in persistent and deliberate steps. In the courts the NAACP successfully attacked restrictive covenants in housing, segregation in interstate transportation, and discrimination in public recreational facilities. In 1954 the U.S. Supreme Court issued one of its most significant rulings. In the case of Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (Kansas), the court overturned the “separate but equal” ruling of the Plessy v. Ferguson case and outlawed segregation in the country’s public school systems. White citizens’ councils in the South fought back with legal maneuvers, economic pressure, and even violence. Rioting by white mobs temporarily closed Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas, when nine black students were admitted to it in 1957, prompting Pres. Dwight D. Eisenhower to dispatch federal troops to protect the students.

Direct nonviolent action by African Americans achieved its first major success in the Montgomery, Alabama, bus boycott of 1955–56, led by the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. This protest was prompted by the quiet but defiant act of an African American woman, Rosa Parks, who refused to give up her seat on a segregated bus to a white passenger on December 1, 1955. Resistance to African American demands for the desegregation of Montgomery’s buses was finally overcome when the Supreme Court ruled in November 1956 that the segregation of public transportation facilities was unconstitutional. To coordinate further civil rights action, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) was established in 1957 under King’s guidance.

Within 15 years after the Supreme Court outlawed all-white primary elections in 1944, the registered black electorate in the South increased more than fivefold, reaching 1,250,000 in 1958. The Civil Rights Act of 1957, the first federal civil rights legislation to be passed since 1875, authorized the federal government to take legal measures to prevent a citizen from being denied voting rights.
Activist African Americans adopted “Freedom Now” as their slogan to recognize the Emancipation Proclamation centennial in 1963 (indeed, a short-lived all-black Freedom Now Party was formed in Michigan and ran candidates in the general election of 1964). National attention in the spring of 1963 was focused on Birmingham, Alabama, where King was leading a civil rights drive. The Birmingham authorities used dogs and fire hoses to quell civil rights demonstrators, and there were mass arrests. In September 1963 four African American girls were killed by a bomb thrown into a Birmingham church.

Civil rights activities in 1963 culminated in a March on Washington organized by Randolph and civil rights activist Bayard Rustin. From the Lincoln Memorial, King addressed the throng of some 250,000 demonstrators gathered on the Mall. The march helped secure the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which forbade discrimination in voting, public accommodations, and employment and permitted the attorney general of the United States to deny federal funds to local agencies that practiced discrimination. Efforts to increase African American voter participation were also helped by the ratification in 1964 of the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution, which banned the poll tax.

The difficulties in registering African American voters in the South were dramatized in 1965 by events in Selma, Alabama. Civil rights demonstrators there were attacked by police who used tear gas, whips, and clubs. Thousands of demonstrators were arrested. As a result, however, their cause won national sympathy and support. Led by King and by John Lewis of SNCC, some 40,000 protesters from all over the country marched from Selma to Montgomery, the Alabama state capital. Shortly thereafter Congress passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which eliminated all discriminatory qualifying tests for voter registrants and provided for the appointment of federal registrars.

During the 1960s the country’s predominantly African American inner cities were swept by outbreaks of violence. Their basic causes were long-standing grievances—police insensitivity and brutality, inadequate educational and recreational facilities, high unemployment, poor housing, and high prices. Yet the outbreaks were mostly unplanned. Unlike the “race riots” of earlier decades, when whites menaced African Americans, the outbreaks of the 1960s involved the looting and burning of mostly white-owned property in black neighbourhoods by African Americans. The fighting that took place was mainly between African American youths and the police. Hundreds of lives were lost, and tens of millions of dollars’ worth of property was destroyed. The most serious disturbances occurred in the Watts area of Los Angeles, California, in July 1965 and in Newark, New Jersey, and Detroit, Michigan, in July 1967.

During the 1960s, militant black nationalist and Marxist-oriented African American organizations were created, among them the Revolutionary Action Movement, the Deacons for Defense, and the Black Panther Party. Under such leaders as Stokely Carmichael and H. Rap Brown, SNCC adopted increasingly radical policies. Some of the militant black leaders were arrested, and others, such Eldridge Cleaver, fled the country. This loss of leadership seriously weakened some of the organizations.

“Black Power” became popular in the late 1960s. The slogan was first used by Carmichael in June 1966 during a civil rights march in Mississippi. However, the concept of black power predated the slogan. Essentially, it refers to all the attempts by African Americans to maximize their political and economic power.

Black youth giving the Black Power salute outside a "liberation school" run by the Black Panther Party in San Francisco in 1969.
Black youth giving the Black Power salute outside a "liberation school" run by the Black Panther Party in San Francisco in 1969.
Bettmann/Corbis
Among the outstanding modern advocates of Black Power was Malcolm X, who rose to national prominence in the early 1960s as a minister in the Nation of Islam, or Black Muslim movement. Malcolm broke with the leader of the Black Muslims, Elijah Muhammad, and founded the Organization of Afro-American Unity before he was assassinated in February 1965.

The Black Power movement was stimulated by the growing pride of black Americans in their African heritage. This pride was strikingly symbolized by the Afro hairstyle and the African garments worn by many young blacks. Black pride was also manifested in student demands for black studies programs, black teachers, and dedicated facilities and in an upsurge in African American culture and creativity. The new slogan—updated from Harlem Renaissance poet Langston Hughes—was “Black is beautiful.”

The Vietnam War, in which African American soldiers participated in disproportionately high numbers, tended to divide the black leadership and divert white liberals from the civil rights movement. Some NAACP and National Urban League leaders minimized the war’s impact on the African American home front. A tougher view—that U.S. participation had become a “racist” intrusion in a nonwhite country’s affairs—was shared by other African American leaders, including King. He organized the Poor People’s Campaign, a protest march on Washington, D.C., before he was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee, in April 1968. Anger and frustration over his assassination set off more disturbances in the inner cities. (James Earl Ray, a white small-time crook, was tried and convicted of the murder.)

The civil rights movement underwent a marked shift in emphasis after 1970. Legislative goals had largely been achieved. And even more significant than some of the civil rights laws was Pres. Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society program. Established as a War on Poverty, it greatly expanded welfare programs. One goal of the Great Society was to help realize some of the intentions of civil rights legislation. This could only be done by opening up opportunities for African Americans in schooling, housing, and the labour force. Thus, a new emphasis emerged: affirmative action programs tried to remedy the effects of historical discrimination by assuring present opportunities. Sometimes quota systems were used in school admission and job hiring, a policy that was denounced by some nonblacks as reverse discrimination. Affirmative action programs helped African Americans achieve notable gains in education and allowed black families to rise into the middle and upper-middle class.

Graduates of Morehouse College, a historically black college for men in Atlanta, Ga., singing the school song during their commencement ceremony, May 2002.
Graduates of Morehouse College, a historically black college for men in Atlanta, Ga., singing the school song during their commencement ceremony, May 2002.
Erik S. Lesser/Getty Images
Nevertheless, many African Americans continued to face difficult social and economic challenges, especially in the inner cities. A reminder of the lingering tensions in some impoverished city neighbourhoods came in 1992, when four white police officers were acquitted in the beating of Rodney King, an African American motorist, in Los Angeles. Hours after the acquittal, the city erupted in riots in which more than 50 people were killed. Smaller riots broke out in other U.S. cities.

Political progress
The voter registration drives that intensified during the 1960s began to show results by the end of the decade. In 1960 only about 28 percent of the African American voting-age population in the South was registered, and there were perhaps a hundred African American elected officials. By 1969, with the number of registrants more than doubled, up to 1,185 African Americans had been elected to state and local offices.

Some of the electoral gains were spectacular. The first black chief executive of a major city was an appointee—Walter E. Washington, who became the commissioner of Washington, D.C., in 1967. But in other cities African Americans were elected mayor—Carl Stokes in Cleveland, Ohio, and Richard Hatcher in Gary, Indiana, in 1967; Kenneth Gibson in Newark in 1969; Tom Bradley in Los Angeles, Coleman A. Young in Detroit, and Maynard Jackson in Atlanta in 1973; Ernest N. Morial in New Orleans in 1977; Richard Arrington in Birmingham in 1979; Wilson Goode in Philadelphia and Harold Washington in Chicago in 1983; Kurt L. Schmoke in Baltimore in 1987. Also in 1987, Carrie Saxon Perry of Hartford, Connecticut, became the first black woman to be elected mayor of a large city. An African American became mayor of the largest city in the United States in 1989 when David Dinkins won the general election after a stunning primary defeat of New York City’s incumbent mayor. Bradley’s attempt, in California, to become the country’s first elected black governor failed in 1982, but seven years later L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia reached that milestone.

African American politicians made gains on the national level as well. The first black senator since the Reconstruction period was Edward W. Brooke of Massachusetts, who served from 1967 to 1979. In 1992 Illinois voters elected Carol Moseley Braun to be the first African American woman in the U.S. Senate. The first African American named to the Supreme Court was Thurgood Marshall, in 1967. When Marshall retired in 1991, he was succeeded by another black associate justice, Clarence Thomas.

The first African American member of a presidential cabinet was Robert C. Weaver, secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD; 1966). Another secretary of HUD, Patricia Roberts Harris, was the first black woman in the cabinet (1977). Andrew Young was named ambassador to the United Nations in 1977. In 1989 Colin Powell, a four-star general in the army, was chosen to be chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff—the country’s highest military post. In 2001 Powell also became the first African American secretary of state. In 2005 he was succeeded as secretary of state by Condoleezza Rice, the first black woman to hold the post.

African Americans reached the pinnacle of U.S. politics when Barack Obama was elected president in 2008. The son of a black father from Kenya and a white mother from Kansas, Obama was a first-term U.S. senator from Illinois when the Democrats selected him as their presidential candidate. His ascent to the presidency was lauded as a great leap forward for race relations in the United States.

Ralph Ellison’s novel of alienation and the blues, Invisible Man, won the National Book Award for 1953. Like its nameless, faceless narrator, many African Americans in the 1940s searched for identity in a white-dominated society. Their concerns were ignored or neglected. Their accomplishments, except as entertainers, went unrecognized. They were excluded from restaurants, theaters, hotels, and clubs.

In protesting the abuse of human rights, King’s leadership and the Black Power movement brought high visibility to African Americans. In the era of the Invisible Man, left-wing causes had exploited African Americans as anonymous symbols of oppression, but in the1960s the media made celebrities of activists such as Black Panther supporter Angela Davis and SNCC’s Julian Bond, who, at age 28, in 1968 was put forward for the Democratic Party’s vice presidential nomination. In the forefront of the civil rights marches were author James Baldwin, gospel singer Mahalia Jackson, folksingers Harry Belafonte and Odetta, and comedian Dick Gregory.

Television and film
Nat King Cole was the first African American entertainer with a network television series (1956–57), but, despite the singer’s great talent, his variety show had trouble attracting sponsors. In the decades following Cole’s death, many situation comedies were marketed with predominantly African American casts, and the large acting ensembles in dramatic series were often integrated. Redd Foxx and Demond Wilson starred in the popular series Sanford and Son (1972–77). One of the most acclaimed weekly shows ever produced was The Cosby Show (1984–92), starring comedian Bill Cosby. Keenen Ivory Wayans, star of the long-running satirical sketch comedy show In Living Color, won an Emmy Award for his work in 1990. The Bernie Mac Show, a sitcom starring comedian Bernie Mac, won a Peabody Award in 2001.

One of television’s most-watched dramatic telecasts was Roots, an eight-part miniseries first shown in 1977. A sequel, the seven-part Roots: The Next Generations, appeared in 1979. Based on author Alex Haley’s real-life quest to trace his African ancestry, the shows made other African Americans more aware of their rich cultural heritage.

Achievements by African Americans in the field of broadcast journalism included those of Ed Bradley, who became one of the interviewers for the television newsmagazine 60 Minutes in 1981, and Bryant Gumbel, who became cohost of The Today Show in 1982. A former anchor on a local news desk, Oprah Winfrey started a popular daytime talk show in the 1980s that became a cultural phenomenon. She established her own television and film production companies, and her media entertainment empire made her one of the richest and most influential women in the United States.

“Blaxploitation” films such as Superfly drew huge audiences in the 1970s, but they did not deal with the everyday experiences of most African Americans. From the 1950s, Academy Award winner Sidney Poitier appeared in more-genuine dramatic roles. By the 1980s other actors were cast in parts that had not been written specifically as “black roles”—for example, Louis Gossett, Jr., in An Officer and a Gentleman (1983 Academy Award). “Buddy pictures” paired white actors with African American stars such as Eddie Murphy, Danny Glover, Gregory Hines, (who was also a dazzling tap dancer), and Richard Pryor. In 2002 Halle Berry became the first African American woman to win an Academy Award for best actress, for her performance in Monster’s Ball (2001). African Americans Morgan Freeman, Denzel Washington, and Will Smith were among the most popular and acclaimed actors of the early 21st century. A completely original talent, director-writer-actor Spike Lee had total control over his productions, which examined contemporary African American life. Other prominent black directors were John Singleton (Boyz N the Hood, 1991) and Matty Rich (Straight Out of Brooklyn, 1990).
The industrial boom that began with the outbreak of World War II in Europe in 1939 ended the Depression. However, unemployed whites were generally the first to be given jobs. Discrimination against African Americans in hiring impelled A. Philip Randolph, head of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, to threaten a mass protest march on Washington. To forestall the march, scheduled for June 25, 1941, President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8802 banning “discrimination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government” and establishing a Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) to investigate violations. Although discrimination remained widespread, during the war African Americans secured more jobs at better wages in a greater range of occupations than ever before.

It is a blind silly goose that comes to the fox’s sermon. 
Ask a silly question and you'll get a silly answer. 
It is a silly goose that comes to the fox's sermon. 
It is a silly fish that is caught twice with the same bait. 
Stop being so silly and immature, Ben!
He doesn't say those silly things that unthinking people say.
My best friend tells me that I am silly to be upset about this.
How silly of you to do that.
It is a silly idea and he has botched it.
That was a silly thing to do!
Don't do that, you silly muggins!
It was silly of Grace to take offence at our innocent remarks.
Her work is full of silly mistakes.
His silly chatter would vex a saint.
How silly of me to expect them to help!
It's silly to quarrel over trifles.
His critics say he's just being silly and petulant.
How can you explain such a silly remark?
Don't be silly, that insect can't hurt you.
Don't be such a silly owl.
Stop messing around, you silly twit!
I've had a bellyful of your silly advice.
Don't do that, you silly boy!
You should trash those silly ideas as soon as possible.
She put on a silly voice as she imitated her boss.
I could not conceive that he would do such a silly thing.
Love makes you stupid : whispers of love is a bunch of stupid, a love letter is silly talk, valentine is a little fool.
Don't pretend to be nice to me. I am very silly really.
That was a bit silly, wasn't it?
Removed from the artificial atmosphere of the fashion show, high-fashion clothes often look cheap and silly.
I hate their parties - we always end up playing silly games.
All kids her age do silly things; it's nothing to worry about.
I made a silly mistake in the examination.
Stop it now, you two?this is getting silly!
I left my keys at home, which was a pretty silly thing to do .
Don't stuff him with silly ideas.
It's silly to get out in the rain if you don't have to.
Sentencedict.com try its best to collect and build good sentences.
She gets into these silly scrapes because she doesn't think before she acts.
Get down off that table immediately, you silly girl!
I don't believe in all these silly diets.
All the other girls seemed silly and superficial to Darlene.
I feel so silly in this outfit.
Stop it, you two. You're just being silly.
No, silly, those aren't your shoes!
Your head is full of silly notions.
We were all bored silly by the play.
He has been plaguing me with silly questions.
She's always getting into silly scrapes - I do wish she'd think before she does things.
She did a silly walk to amuse her friends.
Which silly devil left the fire on all day?
Let's have done with this silly argument.
Have you got nothing better to do than sit there playing that silly game?
The teacher drubbed those silly notions out of the student's head.
There'll be a serious accident sooner or later if people don't stop playing silly buggers.
You're being a silly billy, now stop it.
The person next to me piped up with a silly comment.
They're getting awfully weary of this silly war.
Seriously now, did he really say that or are you just being silly?
Stop playing silly buggers and give me a hand with this!
Don't keep worrying him with a lot of silly questions.
We gave away a silly goal.
You're nearly twenty, yet you keep saying silly things like that.
No, silly, I didn't mean that.
The whole dispute looked silly from my vantage point.
I tripped up in the interview and said something rather silly.
Are you sure he's really interested, and not just playing silly games with you?
Stop asking silly questions.
Of course I won't leave you alone(http://Sentencedict.com), you silly!
Somehow this avoids being just another silly pop song with anodyne lyrics about love and happiness.
His head is stuffed with silly romantic ideas.
I'm getting tired of your silly tricks.
You made a lot of silly mistakes .
You silly big mutt!
Donna would not easily forgive Beth's silly attempt to trick her.
You silly fool, you've lost us the game.
It would be silly to let things which have happened in the past drive a wedge between us now.
I've taken a fancy to that silly hat.
I accredited you with more sense than your silly behaviour suggests.
I was silly to get out in the cold without my sable coat.
It was silly of him to do it.
I know it sounds silly, but I'll miss him when he's gone.
Trish will keep asking damn silly questions.
Don't dignify his silly scratchings by calling it scholarship.
They used to play the fool together, calling each other silly names and giggling.
He's been plaguing me with silly questions all day!
I suppose I did do OK, but I'd be silly to get a big head about it.
He kept on butting in with silly comments.
She's too much of a conformist to wear silly clothes
I'll soon wipe that silly grin off her face.
Jane did such a thing, she is really as silly as a goose.
"I know it sounds silly, but when I get to the beach I feel like a kid again." "We noticed, " she said drily.
She tormented me with some silly questions.
I'll soon put an end to her silly little games.
They study themselves a little silly.
Don't play silly games with me; I know you did it.
He fancied himself in love with me, the silly boy.
The story was so silly it wouldn't have fooled anyone with a grain of sense.
You must think me very silly.
Stop telling such silly fibs.
I was knocked silly by the blow.
This short novel was stuffed out with silly conversation.
There's no need to make silly jokes , David.
What a silly thing to say!
'Don't be silly,' he said, not unkindly.
I feel silly in these clothes.
At one point we quarrelled, over something silly.
Silly mistakes often arouse ridicule.
I didn't want any part of this silly reception. It was all so crass.
What's the name of that guy on TV - you know, the American one with the silly voice?
You can't be excused for such a silly reason.
They served us coffee in these silly little cups.
Just cut it out! I've had enough of your silly jokes.
I screamed myself silly on the roller coaster.
It was silly of you to go out in the hot sun without a hat.
Her ideas are fundamentally sound, even if she says silly things sometimes.
She lavishes attention on those silly little dogs.
He's been getting slack and making silly mistakes.
I was silly to get out in the cold without a coat.
Mike tends to get het up about silly things.
It sounds silly, I know, but I will explain.
You must be badly off for books if you're reading that silly story.
They called it silly to do so.
Everyone was too busy laughing themselves silly to notice her quietly leave the room.
Her silly mistake drew on her disgrace.
From what I know of him he doesn't play silly games.
Stop playing silly buggers and help me lift this.
Don't be so silly - you're acting like a child!
We gave him some stick for wearing that silly hat.
Her silly behaviour puts her in an indefensible position.
They can't expect me to accommodate all their silly little likes and dislikes.
A ghost indeed! I've never heard anything so silly.
You'll drive me to distraction with your silly questions!
Just listening to his silly chatter wears me out.
I was pulling silly faces to make the baby laugh.
I took a swing at him and knocked him silly.
How can you let such a silly incident wreck your friendship?
I got it for a silly price .
She had a silly grin on her face.
A piece of silly gossip was going round the school.
I laughed myself silly at his jokes.
It's silly worrying about things which are outside your control.
John's forever asking silly questions like a stupid.
One silly mistake cost them the match.
It was another of her silly little jokes.
He said something silly and the other boys pounced on it at once.
Fancy hurling away a good chance like that, the silly girl!
You should knock their silly heads together.
Why are you putting on that silly voice?
What a silly old fool he was.
Some may even love all those silly electronic gizmos you want to wow them with.
But I don't like going to posh functions, trying to make conversation with silly people who have nothing to say.
Carrie felt impatient with her - no grown-up should be so weak and so silly - but she was sorry as well.
They beth splutter with anger and burst into silly giggles, wrestling.
Then he batted it to and fro,(http://sentencedict.com/silly.html) chasing it up one aisle and down another and slapping it silly.
Working on this delusion, they then feel either excited and act like silly children or confused and act like silly children.
It's silly to make yourself feel bad.
Don't filter them out because they seem silly, and don't be afraid of being wrong.
That invariably means having to buy another box of silly cards from which you will use only three.
Instead it just looks offensive-nasty as well as silly.
He is still very much alive in the past, so it is very silly for people to cry at his funeral.
Will look silly if I have to spend time driving around in circles to find it.
Silly talk is a sign of shallowness. Foolish vanity is a mark of stupidity. Dr T.P.Chia 
In three years, you could feel pretty silly sitting in front of $ 2, 000 analog set.
It was too easy to be silly and goofy and laugh and use exclamation marks.
She was not going to be fooled by their silly voices and accents.
They were all silly games, which Thornton forbore to join.
But local councillors say it's a silly idea.
She'd acted like a silly hen.
It is silly to exaggerate differences when the similarities are also significant.
Realism is now out of fashion, in large part as a consequence of those silly semantic claims.
The art work is primitive but the silly little joke is what comics used to be about.
I thought it was a damn silly place to park if some one wanted to take a leak in the bushes.
Why should it be silly to feel deeply? 
How could the silly chit have so mistaken his intent?
Enid: I would just give them a big hug and tell them not to be silly.
To a crazy ship all winds are contrary. 
I know it sounds crazy but it just might work.
It was unreal. Like some crazy childhood nightmare.
I love him most crazy with a bang.
The neighbours must think we're crazy.
He's crazy; he ought to be locked up.
Love makes people brave and crazy.
The only way you could meet my crazy was by doing something crazy yourself.
The driver grunted[sentencedict.com], convinced that Michael was crazy.
Who is willing to accompany me crazy,crazy all over the world are touched.
You're crazy to go out in this weather.
Are you crazy? We could get killed doing that.
I'd go crazy if I lived here.
He's crazy to drive his car so fast.
Be crazy if you love.If you don't.then be strong.
You'll have to work like crazy to get this finished.
People thought they were all crazy to try to make money from manufacturing.
He is crazy about Crazy English.
Are you insane crazy out of your mind?
Those who are crazy enough to think they can change the world,[http://sentencedict.com/crazy.html] then he can really change the world.
She must be crazy to lend him money.
Youth is too short to be anything but crazy.
Because loved a crazy, so see you still smiling silence.
Both my sons are crazy about old motorbikes.
He is so crazy about U.F.O.that he laps up all he can read about it.
My mother-in-law has been staying with us this past week and she's driving me crazy.
In the heart of a grave, a smile will become desolate, a person crazy.
If you want my opinion, I think you'd be crazy not to accept.
When Jock woke up and found you gone he went crazy.
I can't imagine lying like that. I would go crazy.
She's just a crazy mixed-up kid.
I'm crazy about Tom.
So there we were with Amy and she was driving us crazy.
I'm crazy for you.
It is a crazy idea.
Donny could be wild and crazy .
He's still crazy about both his work and his hobbies.
That noise is driving me crazy.
I mean, how crazy can you get?
I argued her out of her crazy idea.
The endless noise is driving me crazy.
He strides around the room beaming like a crazy man.
The way that you're doing it is completely crazy.
We worked like crazy to get it done on time.
I know this sounds a crazy thing for me to ask you.
Don't fret, Mary. This is all some crazy mistake.
They stared at me as if I was crazy.
I'm not crazy about Chinese food .sentencedict.com
He was crazy at me for letting the goal in.
He's just plain crazy, if you ask me.
It's crazy to have £7000 sitting idle in the bank.
Sadly, despite the crazy antics and the relentless wisecracking, there's very little plot to carry this film.
Marie says he went crazy, and smashed the room up.
'This is crazy,' she told herself for the umpteenth time .
She's crazy about dancing.
If I thought about all of the what-ifs in my life, I would go crazy.
It was crazy of you to let him go.
This sitting around is driving me crazy.
The kids would answer back, and that drove her crazy.
A crazy man took a shot at her from a rooftop.
You're crazy to buy a house without seeing it.
The sound of his grating voice complaining all day was driving me crazy.
The Republican candidate said he would "work like crazy to stay ahead".
She's crazy to lend him the money.
I alone was sane, I thought, in a world of crazy people.
Turn that music down. It's driving me crazy !
I know this idea sounds crazy , but it may be worth a try.
It drives me crazy.
I would tell my grandmother about all the crazy things I'd been doing and she would just smile tolerantly.
Don't go crazy and spend it all at once.
Dad will go crazy when he hears about this.
He probably thinks you're both crazy!
What started her off on that crazy idea?
I pumped the handle like crazy.
I seriously think she'll go crazy if she doesn't have a holiday soon.
'That's crazy,' I said. 'Isn't it just?' he said.
It's crazy, I know, but there it is.
At one time she was crazy for a cottage in the country; now she wants to get back to the town again.
Some people take crazy risks because they get a thrill from courting danger.
What a crazy idea!
What a crazy scheme, and I use that term advisedly.
It'd be crazy to go out in this rain.
You'd be crazy to risk your money on an investment like that!
I must have been crazy to agree to this.
The car was barreling down the street at a crazy speed.
It's a crazy idea.
I want no part in/of your crazy schemes!
If I sat home and worried about all this stuff, I'd go crazy.
Trust you to dream up a crazy idea like this!
Trust you to dream up a crazy scheme like this!
There were a lot of crazy, dangerous people in the street.
You must be crazy to go walking in such awful weather.
He often works 12 hours a day - it's crazy .
The group's performance always drives the audience crazy.
He went crazy and tried to kill her.
It was a crazy idea to go to the store on a Saturday.
The crowd went crazy when the band came on stage.
He's right on form as a crazy science teacher in his latest movie.
Just dismiss those thoughts from your mind - they're crazy and not worth thinking about.
I'd have to be crazy to get mixed up in that kind of thing.
What started him off on this crazy idea?
We're going to have to work like crazy to get this finished on time.
It's just plain crazy to spend all your pay as soon as you get it.
I'm crazy about you.
Fashion gurus dictate crazy ideas such as squeezing oversized bodies into tight trousers.
Their apparent grief turned to crazy laughter in a minute.
He's got a hare-brained/crazy/daft scheme for getting rich before he's 20.
All the publicity nearly sent him crazy.
Sentencedict.com is a sentence dictionary, on which you can find good sentences for a large number of words.
The kids went crazy when the film star appeared.
Your mother is driving me crazy.
Lorna is completely crazy about her boyfriend.
Is this another one of your crazy schemes for making money?
I've been crazy about him since the first time I saw him.
You're so beautiful you're driving me crazy.
That's why he's got so caught up with this crazy idea about Mr. Trancas.
If he goes one step further with this crazy idea, I'll resign.
My sister's absolutely crazy about chocolate whereas I can take it or leave it.
None of that matters, because we're crazy about each other.
The whole idea sounds plumb crazy to me.
The stuff was selling like crazy.
An insane person is unaccountable for his actions.
Only an insane person could perpetrate such a horrible crime.
He later became insane and was confined to an asylum.
Are you insane crazy out of your mind?
In a fit of insane jealousy he tried to stab her.
He went almost insane when he heard that his daughter had died.
He must be insane to drive his car so fast.
I must have been insane to agree to the idea.
The whole idea sounds absolutely insane to me.
You're driving me nearly insane with that noise.
The accused has been certified insane/certified to be insane.
The whole idea is quite insane.
He was declared insane and ordered to be detained in a mental hospital at Her Majesty's pleasure.
My desire to be rich was an insane, unwholesome,(sentencedict.com) oppressive desire.
Grief drove her insane.
The prisoners were slowly going insane.
They believed him to be insane.
My little brother's been driving me insane all weekend.
In 1975 she was certified clinically insane and sent to a mental hospital.
It seems insane to cut the budget now.
This job is driving me insane.
Why did you do that? Have you gone insane ?
That's an insane risk.
He is criminally insane, unable to stop himself attacking women.
The killer was declared criminally insane.
For the last ten years of his life he was clinically insane.
And those who were seen dancing were thought to be insane by those who could not hear the music. 
Some people simply can't take it and they just go insane.
He believes that too many defendants are escaping conviction by claiming that they are insane.
I couldn't decide whether he was incredibly brave or just insane.
The psychiatrist certified her as insane.
In the last century, mothers of illegitimate babies could be declared insane.
The prisoners who went insane were those who were illiterate and without imagination.
I can't wait to get my exam results. All this waiting is driving me insane.
For an idea that does not first seem insane, there is no hope. Albert Einstein 
Janet had my breakfast laid out on the table and sat there grinning an insane grin at me.
Either he was insane and already suffering from hallucinations, or something absolutely impossible was happening.
He was hatless, his silver hair awry, his eyes glowing with insane fury.
These people were prepared to accept Fleet Street's verdict that he was insane.
They could see that he was genuinely moved and excited by his insane idea.
Steps were taken to improve prisons and insane asylums and to check juvenile delinquency.
The man, who has attacked 13 women, was judged to be insane.
No, I was a sort of insane ghetto personality who got off on the written word,(http://sentencedict.com/insane.html) and went berserk.
On one memorable occasion I worked twenty-seven days straight without a day off-it was memorable only because it was insane.
It was slow, unbearable torture that would drive any man insane.
His work makes a perfect foil to Brown's insane language games.
The woman laughed but in a strangled, off-key kind of way and it struck me that she might be insane.
It would be insane to try to go camping in this kind of weather.
Mum has been a lot more cheerful since Quigley was declared bankrupt, insane and guilty of fraud.
For centuries after his death, the insane were dipped in the waters of his fountains, where many made miraculous recoveries.
In his spare time he ran a barber shop and a scandal sheet, and went spectacularly insane on a street parade.
The doctor certified him insane.
Insane people are sometimes dangerous.
The noise from the construction project is driving us completely insane.
I wondered if they were there to prevent jumpers, like in an insane asylum.
She had the insane desire to tell all that to this man, but she bit back the words.
The place where the criminally insane were kept under lock and key.
Paul must be insane, spending all that money on a boat.
Found something intriguing, improbable, insane or especially useful on the Net?
Their withdrawal, their separatism, was, they said, a sane response to an insane world.
He kept laughing, cackling, making wild, insane remarks.
Would it be totally insane of her to agree to his suggestion?
I wonder at what point in this insane course of tutorials did teacher and pupil begin taking snapshots of each other.
Her chin is low and stubborn and insane.
The white faces of saints had grown insane and bloated, their purity profaned.
I am interactive with an insane asylum.
Others, still living but insane, would be selected and flown up for further tests.
We don't punish people for crimes if they are insane, because we have decided that they can't help it.
She is obviously following this insane dialogue with remarkably close attention.
Of course, he was insane to make the trip.
Doctors certified him as insane.
Can you imagine it, to have grown up insane and then in one fell swoop to achieve sanity?
If we couldn't laugh we would all go insane. Robert Frost 
Sometimes I thought I was going insane.
The Darkfall absorption in that Leeds factory didn't turn him completely insane like the others.
For some insane reason he decided to do the whole journey in one day.
The monotony of prison life is enough to drive anyone insane.
Of course(Sentence dictionary), anyone forecasting such a scenario just five short years ago would have been certified completely insane.
When they see us paddling on the river, they stare at us open-mouthed, as if we are completely insane.
Those who dance are considered insane by those who cannot hear the music. George Carlin 
Their story plays out amid the insane violence of a repressive political regime.
It is quite insane to imagine that you are going to sit in a restaurant adding up calories and grams of fibre.
The jobs in the brave new workplace are tedious and drive people insane.
Of course, there's also a middle ground between a totally loud, insane, free-for-all, and a completely calm, orderly discussion.
Contributors have included a Nobel laureate and an an insane asylum, among thousands of others.
He was a great entertainer but going insane.
Officers unsparing in training their men, to a point which U.S. trainers would probably think insane.
He died in an insane asylum at the age of 47.
An experimental formula has blown up in his face, increasing his intelligence and strength but also driving him insane.
The accused has been certified to be insane.
Black will take no other hue. 
The devil is not so black as he is painted. 
The black ox has trod on his foot. 
Mock not a cobbler for his black thumbs. 
The pot calls the kettle black. 
The kettle calls the pot black. 
There is a black sheep in every flock. 
Her hair was tied back with a black ribbon.
I was born with black hair all over my back, like some sort of freak.
His black hair gleamed in the sun.
Most of the guests will be wearing black tie.
I hope these black marks will clean off.
The police are trying to recruit more black and Asian officers.
Against her black dress, her diamond necklace stood out clearly.
Black clouds have stagnated over the city for several days.
Gray is intermediate between black and white.
I want a plain black jumper with no fancy trimmings.
The actress wore a black wig over her blond hair.
Uncle Geooge got a black eye for ogling a lady in the pub.
The black ox has trod on her foot.
The women have lustrous cascades of black hair.
Let black and white as brothers, South Africa to the prosperity and development.
Can you find Black Hill on the map?
The group is mainly black, mainly working-class.
After black clouds, clear weather.
She had thick black hair and smooth dark skin .
The only light over the deep black sea was the blink shone from the beacon.
The black crow perched on the telephone pole.
Thereis no wool so white but a dyer can make it black. 
It is a small flock that has not a black sheep. 
Although there is no overt hostility, black and white students do not mix much.
The Los Angeles riots reflected the bitterness between the black and Korean communities in the city.
The pictures were in black and white.
I like the contrast of the white trousers with the black jacket.
When he began his musical career, King played only for black audiences.
The air was black from smoking chimneys.
Our cat has glossy black fur.
He noticed a woman in a black dress sitting across from him.
Clouds of thick black smoke billowed from the car's exhaust.
You could buy anything you needed on the black market.
When you fill in the form, please write clearly/legibly in black ink.
The black lettering really stands out on that orange background.
Radio signals received from the galaxy's centre back up the black hole theory.
He reordered two pairs of black leather shoes of the latest type.
Tom is the black sheep of his family.
It was a cold, black night.
Those black clouds presage a storm.
The animal is easily distinguishable by the black stripes above its eye.
Black is the darkest betrayal, forgiveness Who Loved the pain.
He wore a pair of black trousers.
Black slaves used to work on the cotton plantations of the southern United States.
The players wore black armbands as a tribute to their late teammate.
Five out of the ten top role models for British teenagers are black.
Black John was savaged by the police.
It seemed that nothing could fill the aching black void left by Rachel's death.
The last decade has witnessed a serious rise in the levels of racism and hostility to Black and ethnic groups.
I detest racialism, because I regard it as a barbaric thing, whether it comes from a black man or a white man.
There was a thriving black market in foreign currency.
I heard a loud bang and then saw black smoke.
Church bells tolled and black flags fluttered.
Every bean has its black.
Black kicked/headed the ball into/towards the goal.
There are recognised black spots in marriages which can lead to trouble.
It can white out the black letter on paper.
He braced himself for the icy plunge into the black water.
The collision between reality and faith to our young black and blue.
It can be black, white or grey.
The church has an ornate black and white marbled interior.
During the war they bought food on the black market.
The chimney blew out a cloud of black smoke.
Her hands were covered in dust and she had a black smudge on her nose.
I'm going to wear my black dress with the V-neck.
The painter painted the gate black.
The kitten was black with white front paws and a white splotch on her chest.
The riot was precipitated when four black men were arrested.
Black smoke belched out from the forest fire.
They demanded that the agreement be written in black and white.
The Black Sea is facing ecological catastrophe as a result of pollution.
They blasted her into a black room.
She looked incredibly sexy in a black evening gown.
She gives talks about being a black woman writer.
He wore a black cloak[sentencedict.com], like a pantomime villain.
Most evenings there's a party and the dress code is strict - black tie only.
Who is the woman in the black hat?
He was wearing black combat trousers and a hooded fleece.
The book has a diagonal black stripe on the cover.
The black paint on the door provides a contrast for the white walls.
She wore a sleek little black dress.
Soon the bombers would return, black silhouettes against a pale sky.
The hill appeared as a black mass in the distance.
Shall I grind a little black pepper over your pizza?
Susanna was wearing a black silk dress.
Many black people emigrated to Britain in the 1950's.
Those black shoes clash with that white skirt.
The helicopters appeared as two black dots on the horizon.
There's still a tendency to see the issues in black and white.
Black bears are also the animals that hole up in winter.
He only drank a cup of black tea and nibbled at a piece of dry bread for his supper.
Wish you will love sentencedict.com and make progress everyday!
To me, the past is black and white, but the future is always color.
Chandler was instrumental in making Jackie Robinson the first black player in the major leagues.
I stipulated red paint, not black.
She wagered ten dollars on that black horse.
Black coffee leaves a bitter taste in the mouth.
She wore a white blouse and a plain black skirt.
Amalie was dressed completely in black, right down to black lipstick and a black earring.
Life without regret, dead things like a gust of wind; life without regret, it will still have to come; life need not be annoyed, anxious white hair to black; life need not be lamented, loss of self-confidence will lose everything!
She was wearing a black trouser suit.
He was riding on a large black horse.
Factories are no longer allowed to pollute the air with black smoke.
Please don't think I mistrust you, but I would prefer to have our agreement in black and white.
In keeping with tradition, everyone wore black.
This is a black cat with white paws.
He holds a black belt in karate.
Black will dye over most other colours.
The black car drove away from them and disappeared.
I picked out a black suit.
They painted the underside of their planes with a black varnish.
A black Mercedes screeched to a halt beside the helicopter.
No, thick black ink like that won't wash off easily.
Judges wear black robes when they are in court.
The trees were black silhouettes against the pale sky.
A black plume of smoke rose above the city.
The government must redress the imbalance in spending on black and white children.
Upon her head she wore a black velvet hat.
His mood of deep pessimism cannot have been leavened by his mode of transport—a black cab.
He had fuzzy black hair and bright black eyes.
The butterfly is black and white with a blue stripe running down each wing.
Critics claim he exploited black musicians for personal gain.http://sentencedict.com
There is a brooding melancholy in his black and white photography.
Draw a thick black line across the page.
She was wearing a neat black suit.
A number of black youths have complained of being harassed by the police.
Do we need to wear black tie?
In some countries black people do not have equality with white people.
Zambia is black Africa's most urbanised country.
She's a black belt in karate.
I'm looking for a black, leather bag.
It left a black smear on his arm.
She collared my black wool coat with otter pelts.
Mr Black has been a client of this firm for many years.
Wearing a blue skirt, microstrip wheat color skin looks so healthy, black hair like a waterfall vertically over the shoulders, with a reddish face.
Her thick, black hair shone with lustre.
It was still pitch black at that time of the morning.
The term "black hole" is of very recent origin.
Black and white show a clear.
There was a flourishing black market.
You haven't slept well, have you? Your eyes are haloed with black rings.
The zebra is a wild African horse with black and white stripes.
The black and white flag went down, and the race began.
Tracey is wearing a simple black dress.
The red book is on top and the black one underneath.
She had curly black hair and rouged cheeks.
The little black dress is the anithesis of fussy dressing.
Wear the white dress, you know, the one with all the black embroidery.
The air is so black with diesel fumes and coal dust, I can barely see.
These black models are moving in on what was previously white territory: the lucrative cosmetic contracts.
The book read like a black comic burlesque.
The decor is simple—black lacquer panels on white walls.
There is widespread discrimination against doctors of Asian origin.
Rice is the staple diet in many Asian countries.
There were two little girls, one Asian and one with blonde hair.
Asian airlines remain untouched by the deregulation that has swept America.
An Asian is a person born or living in Asia.
Mary is in the lobby of Asian Hotel.
She has an intimate knowledge of the Asian market.
He has his place in the Asian team not because he is white but because he is good.
The economic power of many Asian countries has grown dramatically in recent years.
Investors ranked South Korea high among Asian nations.
However,[http://sentencedict.com/asian.html] there were two disagreements among some Asian and European participants at the colloquium.
The Asian countries along the coast of the Pacific all came out against the US new military base in Japan.
Two thirds of the pupils are of Asian origin.
The plight of the Asian economy is forcing businesses to downsize.
Asian women are more modest and shy, yet they tend to have an inner force.
Asian pupils complained of racial prejudice at the school.
Like working women anywhere, Asian women are buying convenience foods.
Asian buffalo isn't as wild as that of America's.
The financial crisis devitalized the economy of the Asian countries.
The US has been canvassing support from other Asian states.
Jan's been assigned to the Asian Affairs Bureau.
The Asian elephant can be tamed and trained.
I've been invited to an Asian wedding. What happens on such occasions?
The police are trying to recruit more black and Asian officers.
Lichun traditionally signifies the beginning of spring in East Asian cultures.
The government predicates that the market collapse was caused by Asian financial crisis.
Britain is a multi-ethnic society(sentencedict.com), with many black and Asian people.
The mighty U.S. army was humbled by a small South East Asian country.
He came to this country 20 years ago and is the archetype of the successful Asian businessman.
He is due to attend the opening of the Asian Games on Saturday.
Dr Amid was assisted by a young Asian nurse.
Rice is the staple food in many Asian countries.
Five Asian countries lay claim to the islands.
The study revealed that Asian youngsters are streaking ahead in the race to get into university.
The Asian Games meet every four years.
He is bilingual in an Asian language and English.
You can't lump all Asian languages together.
The peoples of Southeast Asian countries all denounced the treaty between these two countries.
Sir Robert was a fountain of information on Asian affairs.
For the longest time, I thought Nathan was Asian.
I'm looking for a particular book on Asian art.
She is a member of a religious sect that was formed from various aspects of Asian religions.
Pan Am accepted an offer to sell its African and Asian routes.
Coconut is a basic ingredient for many curries and other Asian dishes.
A long French liner slipped majestically by with a mixture of European and Asian faces staring curiously from the decks.
African and Asian elephants are distinct species.
Many in the Asian community feel that the police actions were motivated by racial bias.
Politically, Japan became the main Asian bulwark against communism.
Asian immigrants have been moving into middle America in greater numbers.
He hinted a bigger presence for the U.S. military in the Asian Pacific region where China is emerging as a superpower.
Produce stands sell exotic vegetables to Asian customers, and now even supermarkets are getting in on the act.
During the meeting, the two leaders made brief excursions into the issue of Asian security.
Investors were shifting funds from U.S. to Asian stocks.
Therefore, in his lab except one of Germen origin, the rest five were all Asian origin.
Meanwhile, USDA reported that Asian soybean rust was found in Georiga's southwestern most county of Seminole , near the town of Donalsonville.
More importantly, the Asian peoples have a strong sense of self - esteem , self - confidence, self - reliance and self - improvement .
The importance of increasing helmet use follows dramatic growth in motorization around the world, largely from increasing use of motorized two-wheelers, particularly in Asian countries.
Besides, to make headway in European and Asian communication and ideas research.
On trade it is already happening: intra-East Asian trade flows rose to 42% of total trade in 2008, up from 32% in 1990, according to the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
One of the reason for the shrinking of conventional southeast Asian market is due to the emerging local self-dependence enterprises.
As a regional trade intermediary, the prosperity of Cochin-china regional trade promoted unconsciously the development of the entire Asian trade network.
In early August 2004, Malaysia reported its first outbreak of H5N1 in poultry, becoming the ninth Asian nation affected.
But I must emphasise that Asian economies are not all the same.
Offtake from other Asian and Japanese consumers has also been brisk.
Intermarriage is more common among second - and third - generation Asian - Americans.
In 2002, China and its neighbors in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations agreed to resolve the claims multilaterally, but China later insisted on dealing bilaterally with each neighbor.
Second, to promote the reform of international reserve currency system, Asian countries should, based on the Chiang Mai Initiative, explore the SDR as the Asian reserve currency.
The 2010 Guangzhou Asian Games flame was ignited in a traditional sun-ray ceremony at the Juyongguan pass of the Great Wall Saturday morning.
Alcohol aversion differs across Asian groups. MiNDFOOD. Apr. 24, 2008.
A grand foundation stone laying ceremony for Asian Packaging Center Edifice was held yesterday.
The dinner started with club remmendation of Asian pan seared scollop with vegetables.
China was also the last East Asian nation to start a professional soccer league,[http://sentencedict.com/asian.html] despite having a soccer-mad public - at least for European and South American teams.
GUANGZHOU, China: Japan and North Korea put China and South Korea to the sword at the Asian Games on Monday, inflicting demoralising defeats as the football tournament kicked into gear.
She added that worries about tight supplies and unrest in the Middle East will outweigh concerns about U.S. gasoline demand destruction or slower Asian demand due to inflation.
According to the theory of optimum currency areas, the economic development of Asia, especially that of East Asia, will finally result in the coming of Asian currency area.
One day US officials might be grappling with Carville's adage albeit that modern Asian twist.
The discovery is the first good evidence of an Asian living in Italy during Roman times.
I am working in Quincy Asian Resources this summer[sentencedict.com], I was doing some translation.
Phylogeny trees show that brown bear and polar bear is a sister group, American black bear has a close relation with brown bear and polar bear, but has a distant relation with Asian black bear.
The picture shows the engineering contract and annual labor service cooperation between China and Asian ries 1983 to 2007.
Which is the Asian country whose economy is growing the fastest?
More than 95% of Raspberry ketone, Piperonal, Modafinil have been exported to the Europe and America and South Eastern Asian countries and enjoy an excellent fame in the overseas market.
The first involves 2 kinds of Asian carp, big head bighead and silver.
The SBA makes a serious effort to fund programs for minorities, especially African -, Asian - and Hispanic - Americans.
Break Asian records and set sights on world level in sports.
Asexual propagation of a guarantee to the Cayman Asian Taxus species of pure, good quality seedlings.
European stocks rose to a two-year high as reports reassured investors that the global economic recovery is intact. Asian stocks and U.S. stock-index futures also advanced.
South Asian nuclear neighbors, India, Pakistan and China, each control portions of Jammu and Kashmir divided by a ceasefire line called the Line of Control, and Actual Line of Control.
Keepers said Asian elephants have the longest gestation period - at 22 months - of any animal in the world.
Risk appetite is looking healthy at the start of the day, as both Australia and New Zealand released better than expected data, and Asian equity indices ended the session strongly.
It is not the gay coat that makes the (fine) gentleman. 
It's not the gay coat that makes the gentleman. 
It is not the gay coat that makes the gentleman. 
Is fair and wise and good and gay. 
The streets were crammed with gay, laughing crowd.
I didn't know he was gay.
The quality of life for gay men has improved over the last two decades.
I didn't know he/she was gay.
The country is gay with all colors of bunting.
The New York gay action group "Queer Nation" recently outed an American Congressman.
The wedding festivities were very gay.
Mark knew he was gay by the time he was fourteen.
He has crusaded tirelessly for women's and gay rights.
When she told her family she was gay, they reacted with a mixture of shock and incredulity.
The garden was gay with red geraniums.
The gay and lesbian rights group, Stonewall, sees outing as completely unhelpful.
He's waffled on abortion and gay rights.
He sings with the Los Angeles Gay Men's Chorus.
I am happy and free, in good health,(sentencedict.com) gay and cheerful.
In Denmark they have legalized marriage between gay couples.
We had a gay old time down at the dance hall.
Several gay politicians have been outed in recent months.
This repressive law takes gay rights back to the dark ages.
Gay men are a small but significant minority.
A poet could not but be gay in such a jocund company.
The report assesses the impact of Aids on the gay community.
He tended to stick to the relative safety of San Francisco's gay ghetto.
It was important to dispel the myth that Aids was a gay disease.
His latest film is about the experience of being persecuted for being gay.
He claims that prejudice against homosexuals would cease overnight if all the gay stars in the country were honest about their sexuality.
He has spent money with gay abandon.
The streets were gay and full of people.
I don't know he was a gay person.
He is the latest politician to be outed by gay activists.
Gay activists were demonstrating outside the cinema.
The children were gay and cheerful.
The room was festooned with gay paper chains.
She likes to stay at home, but her husband is a bit of a gay dog.
The article examines the portrayal of gay men in the media.
His sexual orientation was a lot more gay than straight.
The peacock displayed its fine tail feathers when it noticed any gay colours.
Tariq takes several gay myths apart in his book.
The word "gay" took on its modern meaning in the 1960s.
No man could switch him off when he talked about his gay social life.
Don't let his sister know he's gay, because he hasn't come out to his family yet.
The streets look gay with bright flags and coloured lights.
The book analyses the social and political ramifications of AIDS for the gay community.
He has always championed the cause of gay rights.
She felt excited and quite gay.
She leads a gay and wild life.
The children were all gay at the thought of the coming holidays.
He was jailed for four years for blackmailing gay businessmen.
Don't get gay in the presence of so many people.
A vociferous opponent of gay rights, he is well-known for his right-wing views.
Gay men are now eligible to become foster parents whether they are single or have partners.
Her speech caused outrage among the gay community.
They object to the movie's depiction of gay people.
He speaks with rage of insinuations that there's a "gay mafia" in Hollywood.
The conversation is light and gay.
Many gay people felt that they were being criminalized for having relationships.
Ford had been blackmailing a gay naval officer.
He supports a ban on gay marriages.
The problem seemed particularly acute among young gay men and gay men of color.
Gay activists might offer the lowering of the age of consent or the war on Section 28.
Now he freely admits to being gay and to having had a stable, loving relationship with another man.
Gay culture has developed a powerful, even merciless system of rewards and penalties based on body image.
The city is currently staging it's first ever lesbian and gay festival with events like plays, cabaret and films.
The bill signed by Leavitt attempts to ban gay student groups without running afoul of this statute.
Gay groups and AIDS prevention groups are beginning to experiment with different kinds of messages.
Robin Williams plays Armand, the relatively butch half of a gay couple.
Oberlin College has a large gay, lesbian, and bisexual student group.
I like gay, relaxing paintings.
The Enola Gay dropped the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima at 8: 15 in the morning of August 6, 1945.
Most fundamentalist churches disapprove of homosexuals, and many leaders of the religious right have aggressively campaigned against gay rights.
Jeffrey: I like the idea of seeing the gay movement as an attitude of mind.
He is vehemently opposed to abortion, gay rights and many aspirations of the Third World.
It's better to have a gay life of it than to commit suicide. Vincent van Gogh 
These liberals, these feminists[sentencedict.com], these gay activists.
And under the aegis of the Duke, a powerful protector, Strayhorn was able to live an openly gay life.
In the process the owners themselves became prominent community leaders and among the biggest advertisers in the emerging gay press.
He deserves better than to be criticised by gay activists with such a cheap shot.
Those countries where public attitudes are most tolerant are those where homosexuals are most visible, and gay groups most active.
In singling out gay men, the offence bears the hallmarks of homophobic prejudice, and belongs to the less tolerant era.
Which, of course, is what gay academics frequently argue when they advance the theory of social constructionism.
He is now openly gay.
Synod members were under pressure to crack down on gay clergy, who were portrayed as leading lives of wild abandon!
The 6-3 ruling was hailed by gay activists as a landmark in homosexual rights.
I was a crew member of the Enola Gay, the B29 that dropped a bomb on Hiroshima.
Or as Gay Byrne knows, even Catholic housewives get the blues.
But the question still rankles: Can a participating Olympic athlete be openly gay today?
Gay people face a constant struggle against bigotry.
The things that male brains are usually good at gay brains are often bad at, and vice versa.
The backdrop was a gay red and white awning over a little blue-painted restaurant.
Self-education is hardly new to gay men in the AIDS epidemic.
She felt lighthearted and gay.
It even raised adverse comments within the correspondence columns of Gay News itself.
Mike Leavitt has signed into law a bill banning public schools from granting recognition or access to gay or lesbian student groups.
The enterprise of AIDS prevention in the gay world has strenuously avoided any detailed examination of these mechanisms.
Moving with unusual speed, the House is expected to approve on Friday a controversial bill to limit gay marriages.
After Stonewall this process sharply accelerated, creating a radical new medical situation in the gay world.
This phenomenon was observed among gay men from the very beginning of the epidemic.
The police, fire department, hotel, stock brokers, lawyers and gay leagues are among these indie leagues.
After he moved to Jersey, one year he held the banner of some New Jersey gay group.
The recent production of the play that used the gay version was a fascinating experiment,[sentencedict.com] not a belated act of justice.
They shouted in gay abandon.
Since the virus can spread through blood, transfusions could account for the 25 percent of AIDS victims who are not gay.
I wasn't acknowledged as being gay.
One of the few surprises came when Marcia Gay Harden won the best supporting actress award for her acclaimed performance in Pollock.
In addition, there are growing networks of gay religious organizations that provide places for gay people to express their spirituality.
But his basic belief was so widespread that gay men themselves sometimes used it as a come-on.
The very behaviors that gay activists had spent years promoting seemed to have contained the seeds of disaster.
Clinton's AIDS "czar" resigned after being criticized by gay activists for being weak.
The conventional wisdom in the gay community is that 10 percent of the adult population is gay or lesbian.
It is said that there is now a comic for everyone and indeed the gay and black communities have thriving titles.
But there are virtually no powerful forces within the gay AIDS prevention movement arguing for prevention first.
This reflects not only homophobia but also sexism, since gay men are stereotyped as effeminate, too much like women.
As a raconteur and conversationalist, scattering indiscretions and gossip with gay abandon, he was the acme of unconventionality.
They represent a considerable achievement on the part of the lesbian and gay trade union groups.
It took a couple of years to develop, but gay activists say they believe that storm has arrived.
Clinton and Al Gore have become ardent defenders of a balanced budget and gay rights.
And that is what gay activists in more and more places are seeking.
He was very loud and boisterous about being gay, and he lost.
This clause provoked considerable anger amongst the gay community and some concern amongst local authorities.
His opinion has been almost universal among gay and AIDS activists even to this day.
At one point a furious gay activists delegation turned up.
That same year, she supported gay activist Cleve Jones when he considered opposing Brown for his Assembly seat.
Still another way of promoting a more embracing gay culture is to make old age more attractive.
Lawrence King, an eighth grader who identified as gay and wore makeup and nail polish, was 15 when he was declared brain dead on Feb. 13.
Derogatory term for a gay Iowan.
However, critics say it violates the rights of gay military personnel and has harmed US national security by forcing out some 14,(sentencedict.com) 000 qualified troops.
The Batesville Daily Guard's owner-manager told a grieving Terence James, that its policy is not to include anyone—gay or straight—as a survivor unless they are legally married.
There are, for instance, "gay" transsexuals, bisexual " swingers ", and lesbian sadomasochistic fetishists.
Unchecked sexual adventurism — whether straight, gay or both — is never a safe or wise way to go.
At 60, he will be Belgium's first French-speaking prime minister in 30 years, a rare centre-left voice in a European Union that has veered right, and one of few proudly gay world leaders.
It was a gay and magnificent revel.
So distinct was Dufy's mark on the visual arts that the word "Dufyesque" is often used to describe the style of work that is gay, lighthearted , and decorative.
These days I am no longer a misanthrope; I love donating to charity and gay sex.
She can marry a gay guy, and you can't marry an Episcopalian?
The sofa was adorned with a gay print slipcover.
In August, another gay man was executed for homosexuality and on July 19 two gay teenagers were executed in the northeastern city of Mashhad.
He's a motorcycle in Milan Industrial Fair told participants: "I have been working without interruption, just happen to appreciate the occasional beauty, but beauty is better than gay love."
I am a gay man, having an affair with a guy seven years older.
It's now up to a divorce court judge to decide how much alimony the state's gay ex-governor Jim McGreevey owes his estranged wife Dina Matos.
Under Sharia law gay sex illegal, with penalty of death as young as 14 years old.
The advantage of that is that it doesn't draw so much attention, or make it sound like we are trying to get people involved in gay rights or in any sort of protest.
Rudy Gay, Andrew Bynum, Beno Udrih and Rajon Rondo are already on my list.
A gay man who stabbed his 'husband' to death was sentenced to at least 13 years in prison after admitting to Britain's first murder in a same-sex marriage, The Independent reported Friday.
We gay people at least have the advantage of being brought up to expect the world of love to be imponderably and unmanageably difficult, for we are perverted freaks and sick aberrations of nature.
In a world of diminishing assets, being gay is arguably more moral than being straight.
While the chimes ring out a carol gay.
In many Muslim countries, the women wear veils.
According to Muslim theology there is only one God.
The Muslim religion was founded by Mohammed.
His grandfather was a Muslim cleric.
Friday is a holiday in Muslim countries.
Stevens became a Muslim and adopted the name Yusuf Islam.
Why not widen the discussion to include the Muslim and Jewish points of view?
The Muslim RDR is demanding a rerun of last week's presidential poll.
He embraced the Muslim religion.
She holds traditionalist Muslim views.
Hakeem is currently observing the Muslim holy month of Ramadan,and fasts between sunrise and sunset.
Harri was the only practising Muslim in the class.
You can't be a Muslim and a Catholic at the same time - it's just not possible.
The regime regards all three predominantly Sunni Muslim towns as hostile and continues to claim that foreign-backed extremists inside them are driving ever-escalating violence.
The Islamists liked his reference to Turkey's Muslim identity.
But, then, if a daughter of Muslim Ummah, does the same, why is she oppressed?
Arroyo has had to make compromises with Muslim family leaders throughout the region while soldiers pursued elements of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, deeply ensconced in the province.
Except for a brief Christian interlude at the beginning of the 11th century, Istanbul has been a Muslim city for almost 1300 years.
What are the prospects for overcoming the strife between the Christian minority and Muslim majority?
Ethiopia'sart springs from her early Christian as well as her Muslim heritage.
Many Christians today feel the need to relate their experience to that of the Hindu, the Buddhist and the Muslim.
Less than 1 percent of the men in any Muslim country are polygamous.
The U.S. military has been at pains not to offend its Muslim host.
The mosque is a activity site and culture center of Muslim religion.
The destruction of the mosque has provoked anger throughout the Muslim world.
This reminds us how al-Qaida was always only one of scores of radical groups that together constituted the dynamic, varied and evolving phenomenon of Sunni Muslim violent extremism.
The trouble started when rumors began to spread that turkic-speaking, mainly Muslim Uighur migrant workers at the toy plant had raped Chinese women.
Zakah is the third pillar of Islam. It is obligatory on each Muslim, male or female, provided its conditions are met.
One of the pillars of Islamic faith, the Hajj must be carried out at least once in their lifetime by any Muslim who has the ability to do so.
Ambassador Liu congratulated Baroness Warsi on her being a member of the British Cabinet as the first Muslim woman.
Thus, passionate bhakti existed long before the Muslim conquest.
The trial has become a target for protests by hard-line Muslim groups who have adopted pornography as a banner issue, claiming it symbolises what they have called the nation's moral decline.
Sunni Muslim insurgents are being blamed for the blasts that killed at least 88 people.
The city essentially owes its fame and beauty to the Moors who transformed it into the Muslim capital of Spain.
Plans are also in the pipeline to include a Chinese woman and a burka-wearing Muslim.
He also the first Muslim leader to recognize the State of Israel.
I Don't like the Mahomet , I negative the Muslim!
Jinnah realized that the Muslim Union must take measures to unite the Muslim organizations under its leadership and contend against the National Congress Party.
And yet Mr Obama's programme of Muslim outreach is already faltering.
The harsh sentence marked the first time a legal punishment had been handed down since female activists began their campaign in June to break the taboo in this ultraconservative Muslim nation.
The Ak-Sray-Ding Tower is located in the northern Turkmenistan town of Kunya Urgench and has become an important Sunni Muslim pilgrimage site.
The Assad regime is dominated by the Alawite minority, an offshoot of Shiite Islam, but the country is overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim.
To the east was the Afghan Taliban, a regime that espoused a ruthless brand of Sunni Islam and viewed Iran's Shia Muslim leaders as heretics.
Rather, the Mujahideen – the Muslim Ummah's vanguard in Afghanistan and Iraq – are the ones who won, and the American forces and their Crusader allies are the ones who lost.
They comprised mostly Levantine Arabs, both Christian and Muslim, who settled in Brooklyn and along Washington Street in lower Manhattan.
One resident called Dahiryart wore a typical Muslim hat and a Sarong .
According to Shaheed Hamid, the mosque's imam, the mosque was established in 1968 as part of the Nation of Islam, an order that was then the most prominent Muslim group in the United States.
Did Obama's mother go on to marry another Muslim named Lolo Soetoro who "educated his stepson as a good Muslim by enrolling him in one of Jakarta's Wahabbi schools?"
That pogrom followed allegations that a Muslim mob had been responsible for the deaths of Hindu activists.
Many Muslim scholars consider statues to be idolatrous, and other AK officials have not disguised their aversion to them.
Between 2006 and 2008 the proportion of Muslim pupils at the Atheneum rose from half to 80%.
In Sulawesi and some other eastern regions, Christian and Muslim populations are roughly equal.
He also accused Western powers of stealing what he called Muslim oil.
Saudi Arabia expects to host perhaps three million people in a ritual journey that every able-bodied Muslim who can afford it must make at least once in their lifetime.
The ninth month of the Islamic calendar, Ramadan, is one of the most important periods in the Muslim year.
The "spring rush", as it is called, is the largest annual movement of people in the world, with a total of 2.38bn journeys over three weeks, surpassing even the Hajj, the Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca.
Macedonia's Muslim Albanians, a quarter of the population, are also griping.
Jan. 15, in the southern Kandahar province police headquarters by suicide attacks, including the police chief Muhammad Muslim Mujahid, including 3 policemen were killed and two wounded.
Violence increased December 27, which coincided with the Shiite Muslim holy day of Ashura.
New members in the house include the first Muslim member of congress.
Gansu province is the main area of Muslim inhabitation in the west - north area of China.
Religion: Islam is the State Religion , Shiite Muslim 60 %, Sunni Muslim 37 %; other 3 %.
Seventy-seven percent of Kashmiris were Muslim; 20% Hindu; and the rest Sikhs and Buddhists.
The other sculpture, which depicts the Muslim relic, the Black Stone of Mecca, contained in a vagina-like marble frame, was considered insensitive to the religion.
Religious sites here are welcoming to visitors, both Christian and Muslim; the day before we had headed out of the city on a Sunday morning for the small, mainly Greek Catholic village of Maalula.
The suicide blast targeted the funeral of a Shia Muslim man who gunned down on Thursday.
Others finger Salman Rushdie's knighthood as an incitement of Muslim outrage.
Across the windows hung thin curtains of muslim embroidered with beetles' wings and with tiny seed-pearls, and as it passed by a pale-faced Circassian looked out and smiled at me.
Pope Benedict is expressing sympathy for religious minorities in the Muslim world.
Uighurs are a Turkic - speaking Muslim people with a culture closer to Central Asia's than mainstream China's.
A Sikh temple has also been attacked, as have two Muslim prayer - rooms.
But that year, he announced his membership in the Black Muslim movement and changed his name, and in 1967, he refused induction into the U.S. armed forces for service in Vietnam.
Malcolm X was an American Black Muslim minister and a spokesman for the Nation of Islam.
In the early eighth century, a Muslim army of Arabs and North African Berbers conquered much of the Iberian Peninsula.
The uprising was initiated with murderous pogrom-like attacks by Tibetan gangs on non-Tibetan members of the population, including the Muslim Chinese minority.
But liberty is abused in an equally insidious way when accusers conflate apostasy with heresy—by alleging that somebody claiming to be a Muslim has erred by advancing false interpretations.
Demonstrators have spoken out against the country's government for months now, but the clashes on the Muslim holy day of Ashura were the worst so far.
These include an Asian man, a white Eastern European and a black African man.Plans are also in the pipeline to include a Chinese woman and a burka-wearing Muslim.
As a Muslim, i'm happy that they provide a prayer mat with kiblat direction and a mushollah at the 2nd floor.
Hence, not only the ideas of the Muslim political philosophers but also many other jurists and ulama posed political ideas and theories.
One of the best known Black Muslim ministers during this period was Malcolm X, converted while he was in prison in 1947, who broke with the movement in March 1964 and was assassinated 11 months later.
On a recent Friday, the Muslim day of prayer, Mr. Abdul was sitting on a battered sofa in the small concrete pro shop, waiting, as always, for a resuscitative flood of players.
Palfrey Junior is a state school, with no religious affiliation. But the fact that 98% of its pupils are Muslim affects the ethos.
The Muslim diaspora and Muslim missionaries are bringing the faith to previously untouched areas.
Bangladeshi Muslim immigrants living in the northern port city of Thessaloniki in Greece, offer Eid al-Adha prayers on November 6, 2011.
In the northeastern state of Assam, ethnic clashes between indigenous tribes and Muslim settlers have killed more than 50 people in recent weeks.
Iraq has a large Shiite Muslim religious shrines, each year tens of thousands of Shiite Muslims from around the world come to pilgrims, mostly from neighboring Iran.
In the cultural anthropology perspective, the pilgrimage every Muslim lifetime of a typical "transitional protocol" is a change in the status of the Muslim community identity and a religious ritual.
It resisted Punic, Roman, and Christian invasions but was conquered by the Arabs and absorbed into Muslim civilization in the 7th.
The ritual slaughter of animals, like this camel in Lahore, is a common sight during the Muslim holiday of Id al-Adha, which commemorates the trials of the Prophet Abraham.
About 20% of the population are Arabs, mostly Muslim, although some are Christian or Druze Israeli Arabs.
Hindu rule was already tottering before Muslim penetration.
When Muslim education in Britain makes news, it mostly concerns the handful of children who attend schools that are formally Islamic, although the secular compromise at Palfrey Junior is far commoner.
Both U.S. and Philippine government claimed that Abu Sayyaf Muslim rebels are linked to al - Qaeda organization.
The same is true for the astonishing progress within Muslim - majority countries from Kuala Lumpur to Dubai.
In the national movement of India, Muslim elite turned to communalism road theat the first step.
And from that position a Christian, Jew, Muslim and Buddhist will all see the same immensity.
He thinks the poorish showing of Muslim businessmen reflects Hindu practices that allow the build-up of family wealth, while Islam dissipates it by mandating legacies to distant kin.
Human rights groups say Beijing is using terrorism as an excuse to persecute independence - leaning Muslim minorities.
This internationally known writer was foully condemned by the Muslim fundamentalists.
The first one was that a Muslim woman can only marry a Muslim man.
The exhibition curator said Australia has been unappreciative of the great achievements of Muslim cameleers.
Muslim men pray during the Eid al-Adha (Kurban Bairam) festival of sacrifice holiday in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan on November 27, 2009.
The developmental trend of religiousness has differences on gender and grade of the Muslim adolescents who live in the local minority municipality.
The Uighurs are a largely Muslim and Turkic - based people who live in far western China.
It is hoped that efforts to better conserve the country's myriad sites could also boost tourism, which is now heavily dependent on Shiite Muslim pilgrims visiting Iraq's various religious shrines.
Yet there are growing worries about the spread of hard - line Islamism in the heavily Muslim banlieues.
In Sulawesi and several other eastern regions, Christian and Muslim populations are roughly equal.
Religion: The people of Mongolia are predominantly Lamaist Buddhist , with 1 4 % Muslim minority.
Muslim vessels could still collect the produce of Burma and Bengal.
I wish all the Muslim brothers and sisters a happy Id al-Adha!
At least 30 people have been killed and dozens injured in a suicide bombing on a Shia Muslim march in the Pakistani city of Karachi, officials say.
A whopping 75 % of non - Jewish, non - Muslim American are circumcised.
Nike produces an all - enveloping athletic uniform to protect the modesty of Muslim women athletes.
Zakat Al-Fitr is meant to alleviate the pain of the poor and to cultivate the sense of brotherhood and solidarity among the Muslim community.
He embraced the Muslim religion when he went to live in the East.
Masarat Alam, the hardliner portrayed as his successor, is vice-chairman of the Muslim League, "a constituent of our forum".
Islam played an important role in the formation of Malay Muslim Separatism in Southern Thailand.
She did not want to marry a man who simply wanted to marry veiling, practicing Muslim.
Third is zakat ( alms giving ). The poor is the god, a Muslim gives its neediest members.
Haj is the main annual Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca in Saudi Arabia, which is due to start in November.
China has accused the men, who are from the western Xinjiang province, of being separatists and has demanded their return. The Uighurs are a Turkic-speaking Chinese Muslim minority.
Muslim pilgrims on their way to Mecca.
In addition, treating all Muslim women's problems as monolithically attributable to their religion is a cul - de - sac.
Mr. Dulame said Iraqis from the Shiite muslim majority generally prefer President Bush.
"I have always had a soft spot for the Shias of the south, " said Shahristani, himself a Shia Muslim.
Party of Democratic Action - Montenegro: Slav Muslim Party, affiliated to PDA of Bosnia and Herzegovina; Leader - Harun Hadzic.
A well - known entrepreneur, Puspo Wardoyo , calls polygamy a responsibility of wealthy Muslim men.
After touring Africa and the Middle East for two months, during which he made the hajj, he returned to Harlem an orthodox Muslim, a man in flux.
He told of a young woman from Burma who immigrated with her family and, upon entering college, identified with fellow Muslim students and began wearing a hijab (traditional headscarf).
At that time, millions of Shiite Muslim pilgrims converged in Karbala, southwest of Baghdad, to mark the religious saints Imam. 700 anniversary of Hussein's death ceremony.
India's minority Muslim population is governed by Islamic personal laws on issues such as marriage, divorce and property inheritance .
Next to the Qur'an the most important Muslim holy book is the Hadith.
Muslim stall keeper applies a cloth to a hanger in Kuala Lumpur.
The attitude of the Muslim rulers toward Hinduism varied.
Muslim cab drivers work at many other U.S. airports, but so far this has emerged as an issue only in the Twin Cities.
Two heads are thought to be buried inside -- John the Baptist and Imam Hussein, the Prophet's grandson, who was killed by a rival Muslim force in the 680 A.D. battle of Kerbala in Iraq.
Investigators suspect the al - Qaida - linked Muslim extremist Abu Sayyaf group may have been involved.
Shi'ite Muslim pilgrims self-flagellate as they gather at the Imam Musa al-Kadhim Mosque in the Kadhimiya district of northern Baghdad on July 7, 2010, to mark the death of the eighth century Imam.
Police in Pakistan say a suicide bomb at a Shia Muslim procession in the city of Quetta has killed at least 50 people.
I heard Cham people are muslim, and they are ethnic minority.
Taj Mahal was built by a Muslim, Emperor Shah Jahan in the memory of his dear wife and queen Mumtaz Mahal at Agra, India.
This can in sha Allah be reinforced when you are praying together as salat in sha Allah is a reminder of the Haq and what being Muslim is all about.
For a Muslim the hajj is the ultimate act of worship.
Lashkar has a very specific pan-Islamic vision: the recovery of all Muslim lands once ruled by Muslims, including India, Central Asia and Spain.
Authorities charged Jose Pimentel, a Dominican-born Muslim convert, with providing support for an act of terrorism, conspiracy and weapons charges.
Authorities had braced for large - scale protests marking the culmination Sunday of an important Shiite Muslim commemoration.
Iraq has seen one of its bloodiest days in recent month, with 60 people killed in an attack on the most important Shiah Muslim shrine in Baghdad.
The Malays and Moors are Muslim, the majority of whom practice Sunni Islam.
But Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, began having second thoughts about a military career a few years ago after other soldiers harassed him for being a Muslim, he told relatives in Virginia.
Siting, drinking thea and preying many time at the day, they are Muslim.
The predominantly Muslim north has progressively ushered in a stricter enforcement of sharia law since 2000.
Security has deteriorated sharply over the past year as rival Shi'ite Muslim groups tussle for power.
Toledo was a holy city for both the Roman Catholics and the Muslim Moors of Spain.
A website message from the purported kidnappers Sunday all female Sunni Muslim prisoners in U.
Ceremonial prostration is part of Muslim prayer.
Ramadan, the ninth month of the Muslim calendar, is the holiest time in Islam.
Will the Muslim Brotherhood Prove to Be Egypt's Version of Ayatollah Khomeini?
Religion: Muslim ( mostly Sunni ) - 94 %; Coptic Christian and other - 6 %.
Rebels opposed to Sharia in non - Muslim south Sudan have been fighting for autonomy since 1983.
Did you know that Muslim men shave their pubic hairs?
A policeman removes his motorcycle as angry protesters burn a vehicle in reaction to a bomb attack on a Shi'ite Muslim procession in Lahore, Pakistan.
Muslim sages tomb in west side of the liberation of North - po.
Muslim pilgrims go around the Kaaba in the Grand Mosque in the holy city of Mecca after morning prayers before the start of the hajj pilgrimage November 24, 2009.
Church of England, Catholic, Methodist, Muslim, Jewish, Sikh and Hindu.
So, my Muslim son has become an infidel!
During the mass, Shiite Muslim leader Ammar al-hakim , son of the head of Iraq's most powerful Shiite political organization, walked into the church.
Abu Ghraib, a hard-bitten town surrounded by lush farmland, is one of the trouble spots for American soldiers facing fierce challenges from both Sunni Muslim insurgents and radical Shi'ite militiamen.
And if we work with Muslim communities, we must understand that Islamic law, known as Sharia, prohibits the acceptance or payment of interest fees on loans.
Muslim worshippers circle the Kaaba at Mecca's Grand Mosque during Ramadan.
And, last but not least, Breivik is antisemitic but pro-Israel, as the state of Israel is the first line of defence against the Muslim expansion – he even wants to see the Jerusalem temple rebuilt.
The peoples need to pressure their governments to take such a stand and prove to the world that the Muslim Ummah is still alive.
This could be seen through the long Muslim hegemony.
At almost every British university, there is an ISOC to which practising Muslim students, seeking soulmates, soon gravitate.
This in - depth ethnographic study looks at buna for several generations of Muslim Oromo.
How can you do the Muslim chauvinist thing?
She says the criticism of Rima is tough, and she remembers U. S. President Barack Obama enduring similar remarks, due to his Muslim heritage.
Muslim martyrs of the Kashmiri separatist movement fill a graveyard in Srinagar, summer capital of the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
Muslim man prayed during at a mosque in Malaga , southern Spain, Monday.
Last summer, Hannah Rosenthal, the U.S. Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism, made a trip to Dachau and Auschwitz with a delegation of American imams and Muslim leaders.
Light cavalry used as mercenaries by Muslim forces. These Akinjis fight unarmoured for speed and are armed with a bow.
In Old Delhi you will find many mosques, monuments and forts relating to India's Muslim history.
Above U.S. soldiers inspect the scene of a double bombing close to a bus station in the Shiite Muslim district of Bayah in western Baghdad on Feb. 11 2009.
The Muslim places of lie over yours.
Since Kashmir was (and is) a Muslim majority territory, Pakistan felt justified in seeing Pushtun warlords charge in from the north-west of Pakistan, late in 1947, to seize control of Kashmir.
The Vatican released a statement condemning the recent terrorist attacks.
The police have found no evidence of a terrorist link with the murder.
Two soldiers were killed in a terrorist ambush.
The CIA agents successfully infiltrated into the terrorist organizations.
A terrorist bomb ripped through the town's packed shopping centre.
On the day after the terrorist attack, the overall mood in the town was one of vengeance.
They aimed to make the country safe from terrorist attacks.
Terrorist groups claimed responsibility for the shootings and bomb attacks.
The terrorist action has been condemned as an act of barbarism and cowardice.
The terrorist threat in the region has kept faint-hearted tourists away.
They believe that judges are too lenient with terrorist suspects.
He was kidnapped and briefly detained by a terrorist group.
Involvement with terrorist groups brought the political party into disrepute.
The embassy is an obvious target for terrorist attacks.
All terrorist crime is detestable, whoever the victims.
Police fear that there may be further terrorist attacks.
The police caught the terrorist who tried to abduct the girl for ransom.
The terrorist drove the car straight through the shop window.
He described the terrorist attack as the work of savages .
The terrorist attack on the UN building has shocked the civilized world.
He was shot by a terrorist with a machine-gun.
The bombing was the latest in a spate of terrorist attacks.
The political party is used as a cloak for terrorist activities.
This latest attack is a grim reminder of how vulnerable our airports are to terrorist attack.
Without the gun, I'm a sitting duck for any terrorist.
Demand for transatlantic flights has been hit by fears of terrorist attacks.
The couple were unlucky enough to be in the hotel when the terrorist group struck.
The police busted him because they think he's involved with a terrorist group.
It's often said that one person's freedom fighter is another person's terrorist.
The violence is unlikely to stop without military strikes against terrorist bases.
He masterminded a number of terrorist attacks.
These offices are highly vulnerable to terrorist attack.
Terrorist attacks made our position very unhealthy.
They're a worrying political party because of their close links/ties with terrorist groups.
The government says it is being held to ransom by the actions of terrorist groups.
Terrorist activity in the area has frightened most tourists away.
The President took the unusual step of altering his prepared speech in order to condemn the terrorist attack.
An Italian court convicted him in absentia for his terrorist activities.
The government will not give in to terrorist threats .
The road blocks were a counter to terrorist attacks in that area.
Police said the explosion bore all the hallmarks of a terrorist attack.
How many people have died at the hands of terrorist organizations since the violence began?
Any major airport or station is potentially a terrorist target.
The jitters are worst in the capital, where 61% of people are fearful of a terrorist attack.
It's a prime target for terrorist attacks.
A terrorist bomb that left 168 people dead.
Terrorist attacks on senior officials were threatening to destabilize the government.
The shooting may have been in retaliation for the arrest of the terrorist suspects.
The government has said that it will not be intimidated by terrorist threats.
The group is believed to have been responsible for several terrorist incidents.
An anonymous letter alerted police to the possibility of a terrorist attack at the airport.
The terrorist was kept under police guard.
He paid the terrorist a ransom of 50000 for his kidnapped son.
People are seeking retribution for the latest terrorist outrages.
The terrorist demanded money from the child's parents.
The terrorist attack prompted knee-jerk legislation.
One American was killed and three were wounded in terrorist attacks.
Fears of renewed terrorist attacks cast a cloud over the event .
This is another outrage catalogue of terrorist inhumanity.
Terrorist groups and the government have been engaged in a costly war of attrition since 1968.
Victims are demanding retribution for the terrorist attacks.
The army rounded up all the usual terrorist suspects.
The bomb, which killed 15 people, was the worst of a series of terrorist outrages.
The explosion had all the hallmarks of a terrorist attack.
Terrorist threats are driving away tourists.
They publicly disavowed any connection with terrorist groups.
They set about disbanding the terrorist groups.
The police have to take any terrorist threat seriously.
The number of terrorist attacks has increased to a terrifying degree.
The former leader of the terrorist group has called for an end to the violence.
He was found guilty of terrorist activity.
Without my gun, I'm a sitting duck for any terrorist.
The putative leader of the terrorist organization was arrested by police in Birmingham yesterday.
Wish you can benefit from our online sentence dictionary and make progress every day!
In spite of last night's terrorist attack, most people seem to be going about their business as if nothing had happened.
The terrorist group is still looking to revenge itself on its attackers.
Fear of terrorist attack has turned the conference centre into a fortress.
There has been an increase in terrorist attacks.
Mr O'Hara had no known connection with terrorist activity.
An unknown terrorist group has claimed responsibility for this morning's bomb attack.
Their tactics have been copied by other terrorist organizations.
The plane was blasted out of the sky by a terrorist bomb.
Twenty people were killed in the latest terrorist attack.
The terrorist attack, in which two innocent tourists were murdered, is the third outrage of its kind this year.
The police are now allowed to detain terrorist suspects for as long as a week.
The rebels finally agreed to a ban on terrorist activity.
Aircraft remain likely terrorist targets.
He was adjudged a terrorist.
The terrorist group is believed to have significant quantities of guns, ammunition, and explosives.
This latest terrorist attack is bound to delay the peace talks even further.
There are growing fears for the safety of the kidnap victims -- fears that have been fuelled by rumours of new terrorist threats.
The terrorist threat is still real, and the public should remain vigilant.
During the court case it emerged that both men had convictions for terrorist offences.
The terrorist crimes dripped horror.
Security chiefs fear a new wave of terrorist bombings.
We will never give in to terrorist demands.
In recent years, there has been an upsurge in terrorist activity.
A terrorist group has claimed responsibility for the killing.
Agents thought they would find a terrorist network with tentacles extending nationwide.
The terrorist dusted for Atlanta.
The Institution has been the target of terrorist attack several times.
The terrorist fringe condemned the decision and threatened to use force.
The emergency services in this area simply couldn't cope if there were a major accident or terrorist attack.
Terrorist attacks led to the rupture of relations between the two countries.
A warrant has been issued for the arrest of a suspected terrorist.
The group uses a charity organization as a cloak for terrorist activities.
The terrorist groups have been extorting hundreds of millions of dollars.
Tim Lancaster, said Wang slightly Division, National Security Agency that now there is no need to change the terrorist threat alert level in Sweden.
How do terrorist organizations infuse this condition in their recruits?
Nobody wants to give in to the demands of terrorists, but in a situation like this, which did not involve a terrorist group, or release of prisoners, they could have just accepted his demands.
He says he saw a terrorist act, and saw the police car fly into the air.
Beijing denounced the killings as a terrorist act[sentencedict.com], but said it will continue its friendly relations with Khartoum.
The Unabomber a terrorist who targeted scientists in an effort to derail runaway technological development.
As currently worded, the act defines a terrorist group as any organization with two or more people that has engaged in a range of violent activities against persons or property.
Iranian-government TV is calling the explosion that killed a physics professor at Tehran University a "terrorist act."
Instead, terrorist and guerrilla killings follow an L-shaped power law curve.
The Tajik side reiterated that it strongly condemned East Turkistan terrorist forces and supported china's policy on this question.
Senior Indian officials have cleared a hurdle for a long-awaited electronic database aimed at tracking and preventing terrorist activity.
As Bandar parceled the story out to me over next several weeks, it became evident that the Saudis felt they had intercepted the plan and excised the terrorist cell that was to carry it out.
A day earlier, the Greek Foreign Minister Drew Chasi said that the Greek of the recent leaders against foreign embassies and mail bombing has nothing to do with international terrorist organizations.
They were ordered by the organization to set up a violent gang and to premeditate terrorist activities. The case is under further investigation.
This will be their first meeting after the terrorist attack in Bombay.
"If one looks at some of the terrorist acts that have occurred within the past several years, you'll see that a substantial link between false identification and terrorism" he said.
Thoroughly expose the conspiratorial international terrorist organizations and put an end to their inhuman plans!
A hundred million Christians were under the heel of the most barbarous tyranny in history: the Bolshevik regime of the greatest terrorist of them all, Joseph Stalin.
"Those Taliban who are not part of al-Qaida or other terrorist networks are welcome to come back to their country and lay down arms and resume life under the constitution of Afghanistan, " he said.
The hour-and-a-half-long debate began with questions about the killing of terrorist leader Osama bin Laden on Sunday and US policy in Afghanistan, the Middle East and North Africa.
But truth a delicate and malleable thing : Is Luke Skywalker a freedom fighter or a terrorist?
Oscillations could render the escalator unclimbable, and it may be a terrorist target.
In Iran the same mischievous propaganda is at work to befool the rather ignorant—or less knowledgeable—public that it poses a threat and is a fanatic, terrorist country.
As for activities by some "Eastern Turkistan" elements in Turkey, Turkey will restrict them. The Turkish government will not support terrorist activities by "Eastern Turkistan".
In March 2008, the State Department designated al-Shabaab, a Somalia-based extremist group with known ties to al-Qaida, as a foreign terrorist organization.
Qin says the 17 men are members of the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, a group the United Nations lists as a terrorist organization.
The explosion, outside Baghdad's police academy, was the second major terrorist attack in Iraq in three days.
Mumbai large - scale terrorist attack with many casualties.
Under the situation of the treat of terrorist act such as blast increasing, blast resistance of structures has been a new research field.
Iraqi terrorist , Khay Rahnajet , didn't pay enough postage on a letter bomb.
They said terrorist groups such as al - Qaida did not represent the aspirations of the Uighur people.
So the question of dealing with Hezbollah, or whether they deal with themselves by becoming a real political party instead of a terrorist group, is obviously on the agenda.
A man named Sam Lowry is hired to investigate a printer jam that led to the accidental imprisonment and death of a regular citizen, Archibald Buttle, instead of a wanted terrorist, Archibald Tuttle.
The 'East Turkistan' separatist forces have made several terrorist attacks within and outside China's borders.
Unprecedented extremism and outrageous terrorist activities in the contemporary world are direct or indirect repercussions of degradation of consanguine families to nuclear families.
A terrorist faction founded in the Middle East,(sentencedict.com) this group has a reputation for ruthlessness.
Security officials believed that it was a terrorist attack, but didn't rule out other possibilities.
Approximately 20 states prosecute these cases under existing criminal laws, charging people with aggravated assault, reckless endangerment, homicide or attempted homicide, or terrorist threat.
Did not vote on a September 2007 Senate resolution calling on the administration to declare Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps a terrorist organization.
Selected by Israel from among the 6,000-odd Palestinians it holds in its jails for terrorist (as opposed to mundanely criminal) offences, they are to be freed in two months' time.
If Osama bin Laden is the mastermind of a terrorist network, he has spawned vigorous offshoots.
Krishna Bharat created Google News as a search engine in response to Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on New York City's twin towers.
The terrorist organization set off a smoke bomb and ran away in the chaos.
Living hosts do. Creating something bad deliberately, whether the creator is a teenage hacker, a terrorist or a rogue state, is a different matter.
Their ranks swelled after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
I wish to repeat what I wrote in my Message for January1: It is a profanation of religion to declare oneself a terrorist in the name of God, to do violence to others in his name.
Bouthaina Shaaban, Assad's media adviser, said Davutoglu would hear a protest that his country had failed to "condemn the brutal killing and crimes committed by the armed terrorist groups".
Hamas has not renounced the armed struggle. Does China take it as a terrorist organization?
A counterterrorism source described "Gabs" as a "shadowy figure" and confirmed that he had been one of the factors that had led investigators to the terrorist cell behind the airline plot.
Lip service is paid to Palestinian goals, but the radical terrorist agenda would not be satisfied by Palestinian statehood.
The Intelligence Reform and Terrorist Prevention Act of 2004 established the current intelligence structure.
His scraggly beard, prayer callous on his forehead and thick glasses make him look more like an unpleasant and pious schoolmaster than a terrorist mastermind.
Syria must close terrorist camps and expel terrorist organizations.
The East Turkistan terrorist forces pose grave threats to stability and security in China and Central Asia.
Why is a violist like a terrorist?
Lesser actors might have baulked at playing an IRA terrorist or an incomprehensible Irish boxer or, as with Benjamin Button, a kind of half-Gump, half-Kermit dimwit. But not Pitt. 
The streets bristled with armed guards after the latest terrorist attack.
(1) This airborne stakeout was directed at one Jose Padilla, otherwise known as Abdullah al-Muhajir, a Brooklyn-born street thug now identified by investigators as a would-be Qaeda terrorist.
New York City Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said police have been doing strict control measures, including dealing with a terrorist dirty bomb may be cast.
The rest of that awful day was dominated by another terrorist act.
You are to repulse an attack of terrorist detachments at each level.
That question, so teasingly close to the right one, is, Why do people join terrorist groups?
Defenders of the selection of Mr. Feinberg point to his almost three years spent as a pro bono Special Master of the fund that compensated victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
The terrorist attack rammed home the need for tighter security.
But global warming — long-term, diffuse — remains a far more difficult threat to perceive than the lone terrorist or the rogue state.
Iran has Revolutionary Guards stationed in Lebanon and it, effectively, holds sway over extremistShiite Moslem terrorist groups, such as Hezbollah, the Party of God.
Spokeswoman Jiang says China wants the men to be prosecuted in China, because they are members of the East Turkestan terrorist organization, which is on a sanction list of the U.N. Security Council.
Massacres the picture too to be terrorist.
The terrorist sieges all round the industrial park, initiates a round firepower formidable fly upon(sentencedict.com), hits special police officers no place to hide to be on the verge of death.
Spending will probably have to rise again to pay for increased efforts to provide surveillance, infiltrate terrorist ranks and perhaps find a "supergrass" or two to testify against former associates.
Officials in the city of Kashgar says the groups, including the East Turkistan Islamic Movement and Hizb ut-Tahrir, were linked to international terrorist organizations.
Sixty-seven British lives were extinguished – "the worst single terrorist atrocity ever visited on this country," as one of your newspapers put it.
Arab Americans: the Aftermath of the Terrorist Attacks on the U.S.
An informer denounced him to the police ( as a terrorist ).
Last year, many Pulitzer awards went to reports about the terrorist attacks of September 11 th, 2001.
You diverted money from my wife's foundation to a terrorist group?
Such a historic step would do as much to prevent another terrorist strike on US soil as anything else Mr. Bush has done overseas in the nearly six years since the Sept. 11 attacks.
Bout will face trial in the United States for conspiring to kill Americans by selling weapons of war to a terrorist organization.
I think it just reflects that you are acting in an illegal way and that is a terrorist act," he said.
China's foreign ministry called the incident an " inhumane terrorist deed. "
It said the action had been taken after the money transfer firms had refused to allow their service to be used for what it called terrorist fundraising.
Six people were killed in the terrorist attack on the airport.
She notes the assault on India's commercial capital was sophisticated in the style of an al-Qaida terrorist act.
The foreign ministry called the ambush a "dastardly terrorist act."
The Sana news agency quoted an unnamed official as expressing "regret" that Arab states had "completely ignored facts on the killing and sabotage committed by armed terrorist groups".
Livni said Israel opposes any dialogue with Hamas and does not consider the group a legitimate organization, but rather a terrorist group.
Sudan has condemned killings as a heinous crime. Beijing denounced the killings as a terrorist act, but said it will continue its friendly relations with Khartoum.
The fundamental agenda of terrorist organizations, however, "is to overthrow the existing political system and drastically change the socio-economic environment, which they consider immoral.
The collapse of the Twin Towers became the biggest terrorist attack in American history.
A senior Spanish conservative ideologue admitted 10 years ago that for precisely this reason he feared the end of ETA more than he feared the group's terrorist campaign.
That belief became illusion on September 5, 1972, in Munich when Israeli Olympians were taken hostage by the Black September terrorist organization.
He said the French foreign intelligence service and has maintained a close relationship, close attention to the training base of these movements of terrorist organizations.
Al-Shabaab, also known as the Mujahedeen Youth Movement, was officially designated as a terrorist organization by the U.S. government in March 2008.
He also supplied weapons to the Provisional Irish Republican Army, a listed terrorist organisation in the United Kingdom.
A: You mentioned that some countries do not recognize East Turkistan forces as terrorist forces. I do not know who has made such remarks and at what occasion.
Will the Next Terrorist Attack Be Delivered Via Cyberspace?
The "Eastern Turkestan" terrorist forces are trained, equipped and financed by international terrorist organizations.
New Yorkers initially braced themselves for another terrorist attack.
The youngsters were lured into a terrorist organization.
Security threats including the inadvertent misplacement, theft and diversion of inventory, product tampering and possibly even illegal uses such as for terrorist acts.
With an apparently endless supply of funds at their disposal, MEK members have repeatedly and unsuccessfully petitioned the federal government to have their names taken off the terrorist list.
A nuclear device can range from a weapon carried by an intercontinental missile launched by a hostile nation or terrorist organization, to a small portable nuclear device transported by an individual.
The fight against the East Turkistan terrorist forces takes up an important part of the international counter-terrorism campaign.
He says he saw a terrorist act, and saw the police car fly the air.
Police also said security forces were still two luxury hotel and a Jewish center terrorist insurgency.
It says the terrorist group has been depleted, but still continues to pursue large-scale attacks on the Western targets.
This is one of the best ways that the world undermined al-Qaeda: Showing Muslims that the terrorist group doesn't care about the people they purportedly fight for.
It was the single worst terrorist attack that the world has ever seen.
The best hope we have is to go after and destroy the terrorist organization.
Zawahiri formed his own terrorist group as a teenager, and ever since he has fought autocratic Muslim regimes and the United States with both tenacity and intelligence.
Later, terrorist groups unaffiliated with any national liberation movement would also find it relatively easy to acquire the assault rifle.
More and more, state, local and tribal front-line law enforcement officers are most likely to notice the first signs of terrorist activity," Napolitano said.
Are there any terrorist organizations in the region except Bin Ladin and his Al Qaeda?
Raul: One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter.
The bomb was planted by a terrorist group or by a group of terrorists.
Earlier this year, an air crew foiled a woman's alleged effort to ignite a commercial aircraft in an apparent terrorist act, and the plane successfully made an emergency landing in western China. 
Special Forces are often deployed to preclude , preempt and resolve terrorist incidents abroad.
The Scotland Yard said that it is investigating the incident but have so far discounted a terrorist motive.
The settlement resolves a lengthy government investigation into the company's financial dealings with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia or FARC designated as a terrorist organization under U.
Gallup first asked the question in early 2001, before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11.
Do you seek to enter the United States to engage in export control violations, destructive or terrorist activities or any illegal purpose?
Madrid terrorist bomb video closed circuit television.
The issue of terrorist safe havens inside Pakistan is an increasing irritant between Washington and Islamabad.
I have concluded the ABM treaty hinders our government's ability to develop ways to protect our people from future terrorist or rogue state missile attacks.
Through continued intelligence - sharing, we can disrupt terrorist plots and dismantle terrorist networks.
He was a member of a terrorist sleeper cell ctu had under surveillance in 2002.
We broke up a Southeast Asian terrorist cell grooming operatives for attacks inside the United States.
Abu Sayyaf and Jemaah Islamiyah are considered to be sympathetic to the al - Qaida terrorist network.
However, the risk of terrorist attack is not the test range.
Israeli spokesman Mark Regev says Hamas is a terrorist organization that refuses to renounce violence or recognize Israel.
Fighting terrorist activities also becomes one of the missions for the special forces.
At present there are still too many people with power, who have collaborated in the false terrorist attack who can exert pressure upon those anxious to release the truth.
This week Theresa May , the home secretary , announced a review of counter - terrorist measures.
Preventing a terrorist or a disgruntled employee from contaminating milk, juice, produce, meat or any type of comestible is a daunting problem.
He was a terrorist, one of the FBI's most wanted criminals and the mastermind behind the worst terrorist attack on US soil. Now, Usama Bin Laden is dead.
Each time he learns more, both about the terrorist attack and his real life personal situation, even though Rutledge and Goodwin constantly direct him to focus on finding the bomber.
Public-health chief Gennady Onishchenko accused Dr. Lvov of an 'informational terrorist act, ' according to the official ITAR-Tass news agency.
We remain committed to APEC's work to combat money laundering and terrorist financing.
A spokesman for the al Shabab terrorist group claimed the suicide attack was in retaliation for the killing of a wanted senior al-Qaida operative in the region.
India blames the 60-hour attack on the outlawed terrorist group Lashkar-e-Taiba, believed to have been created by Pakistani intelligence agencies to fight Indian rule in the divided Kashmir region.
Terrorist groups have placed a growing emphasis on recruiting Westerners and inspiring them to launch small-scale attacks.
The industry has yet to recover from an across-the-board revenue drop that followed the 2001 terrorist attacks.
The success of terrorist organizations crime of laundering means the decriminalization of terrorist organizations black money that is got through illegal channels such as smuggling and drug trade.
We like peace, and we hate East Turkistan terrorist!
A terrorist faction founded in the Middle East, Guerilla Warfare, has a reputation for ruthlessness.
The menu features sandwiches and burgers with names such as "Terrorist meal" and "RPG"(sentencedict.com/terrorist.html), as well as "Kalashnikov".
Gloom had usurped mirth at the party after the news of the terrorist act broke.
Did he ever talk to you about a terrorist attack, nerve gas?
He said: "We must guard against terrorist attacks with dirty bombs, radioactive substances and the general mix of explosives, you can create a dirty bomb."
Al-Qaida's second-in-command has been killed in Pakistan, delivering a "major blow" to the terrorist group still reeling from the death of Osama bin Laden, American officials said on Saturday.
It is the largest cache of intelligence information gotten from a senior terrorist that we know of.
He also denied reports that the United States plans to designate I.H.H. a terrorist organization.
He was a terrorist and a murderer , pure and simple.
"It has proven to be an adaptable and resilient terrorist group whose desire to attack the United States and U.S. interests abroad remains strong," the report said.
In a country where the threat level remains "severe"—notwithstanding whispers that it may be dropped a notch over the next year—a focus on foiling terrorist plots is understandable.
Terrorist attacks were threatening to destabilize the government.
A Iraqi terrorist, Khay Rahnajet , didn't pay enough postage on letter bomb.
The three Bali bombers vow their followers will avenge their execution, but most terrorist experts agree Jemaah Islamiyah is no longer capable of launching major terrorist attacks.
The Taliban also fit this pattern: a potent terrorist organization that provides not only security but also such services as dispute adjudication.
This swelling demographic of young, unemployed Yemenis represents a significant socioeconomic concern and a potential target for radicalization and recruitment by terrorist organizations.
Experts say that was also when he began to provide aid to what some governments considered terrorist organizations. These included the Irish Republican Army and the Abu Nidal Group.
And I announced two reviews -- a review of our terrorist watch list system and a review of our air travel screening, so we can find out what went wrong, fix it and prevent future attacks.
The Bible calls him an insurrectionist and a murderer, so he was an imprisoned terrorist awaiting execution.
Yes, Even though there has security measure, But may not avoid some terrorist sabotage.
A Chechen Mujahedeen Terrorist video taped the gruesome execution of 6 Russian soldiers.
According to Russian Federal Security Bureau Investigation Bureau speculated, is suspected of planning terrorist attacks 22-year-old Kabardino - Balkar Republic Islamic Hamm Jef residents.
An Army unit in Honduras once labeled an operation in Honduras "Blazing Trails," which in Spanish can translate to "Shining Path," the name of Peruvian terrorist group.
Many Republicans have called for WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, an Australian, to be prosecuted under the US Espionage Act, or for his site to be deemed a "foreign terrorist organization.
SUFFERING from a tsunami or terrorist attack comes in stages.
Police even detained and interrogated members of the Hash House Harriers, a beery running club, suspicious that the flour they used to mark their runs might be part of a terrorist attack.
Beijing, China (CNN) -- China has caught 10 members of a terrorist group, including the leader, the Ministry of Public Security said Thursday.
Pakistani terrorists regularly defect to another terrorist group with a totally different political platform.
A terrorist underworld - including groups like Hamas, Hezbollah, Islamic Jihad, and Jaish-i-Mohammed - operates in remote jungles and deserts, and hides in the centers of large cities.
They are among many terrorist groups using the Internet to extend their reach to radicalize disaffected youth into forming their own terror cells to bypass improved security measures.
Turkish Interior Minister, said the explosion sain "very much like a terrorist attack."
Iraqi terrorist , Khay Rahnajet , didn't pay full postage on a letter bomb.
After the terrorist attack, people look consternated.
Kasab says that he and nine other Pakistanis were trained by the terrorist group Lashkar-e-Taiba and a number of retired Pakistani military men.
A terrorist standing on my side to open fire everywhere.
Any way you look at it, trying to talk sense to a stroker is like trying to sell capitalism to a terrorist.
"The break-up of this large terrorist group once again proves that the East Turkistan Islamic Movement is the major terror threat facing China at present," Wu said.
Skepticism and the sense of life nihility provide psychological hotbed for the spread of terrorist crime.
